Chapter 38: Fort under ocean

            The daitya king Kamsa had two wives named Asthi and Prapthi. They went to their father Jarasandha, the king of Magadha, with their pathetic story of the demise of their husband. Jarasandha was heart broken to find his daughters in such sorrow. He impulsively thought of destroying the entire community of the Yadavas. With a large army, he marched towards the capital city of the Yadus. Krishna decided that the time had come for him to lessen the burden of mother earth by vanquishing the evil minded people, the primary mission of his incarnation. The purpose could be achieved by destroying the enemy army except Jarasandha. Only then would he be able to create situations to provoke Jarasandha, leading to the death of many more wicked men.
 
            While Krishna was contemplating thus, a couple of golden chariots descended from the sky, laden with various powerful weapons. Krishna told Sankarshana, “You can see for yourself the magnitude of the calamity posed before the Yadus of whom you are the Lord. You take the chariot containing weapons of your choice to appropriately repulse Jarasandha’s challenge. In order to keep our promise to earth, we must ascertain that the army of the enemy is extinct." Determined on a prompt action, they came out of the city.  Krishna blew his conch, the resonance of which rattled the enemies to the core. Jarasandha, arrogant about his power as a warrior, thought it was humiliating for him to accept the challenge of a boy who was no match to him. So he called upon Balarama to come forward. He mockingly told Balarama that he need not have hopes of being the victor as the risk of his becoming a victim was greater. Krishna returned the undignified words with an equally strong rebuke. He said, “A true hero never sings his own glories but displays his manliness in action. Blowing ones trumpet is considered uncivil. You cannot threaten us by your empty weightless words.” Krishna by his volley of arrows and Balarama by his dexterity with the mace made the enemy lick dust. Jarasandha’s army fell to the ground lifeless. Balarama pulled down Jarasandha from his chariot and caught him in the varuni noose. A human ring captured him in an inescapable cage. Balarama could have smashed his head with a single blow but was stopped by Krishna as Jarasandha’s contribution was important for carrying forward his mission. Jarasandha fell in his own esteem by Krishna’s little act of mercy. His ridicule of Krishna as being chick of a boy who was no match to his valour, boomeranged on Jarasandha with the same force. His subordinate kings dissuaded Jarasandha from becoming a recluse. He, therefore, retreated with his head hung in shame. With the battle over, the people came out of their hidings to applaud the victory of the brothers with the sounding of tabors, music and showers of flowers.
 

Balarama defeats Jarasandha
 
            Jarasandha attacked the Yadavas persistently seventeen times but every time he cut a sorry figure. Narada, anticipating another attack, sent Kala Yavana with a large retinue to earth. Seeing Kala Yavana on a spree to seize the city, Krishna could rightly conjecture the reaction of Jarasandha. Krishna knew that Jarasandha would  be out with his army as well. It would be difficult for the Yadavas to handle the double pronged attack from two armies. Krishna suggested to his brother they build an impregnable fort under the ocean where the Yadavas could live free from harm. Agreeing on the plan as the ideal solution, they took the assistance of the celestial architect Vishvakarma. It was a well planned fort with the necessary amenities. The celestial deities provided the comforts they could offer Krishna. The golden summits and the gem studded canopies of the fort made it appear like paradise on earth.
 
          [In the Dvapara yuga, if the technique of under water construction was known, it is not surprising to find road tunnels below water connecting various parts of cities in the modern world. In Hongkong, a road tunnel under the ocean connects it to the mainland, Kowloon. Similar connection of the places on the either banks of river Thames is found. Dover to Calais, across the English channel, is the famous under water tunnel for transport]..
           
            Krishna made sure that all the Vrishnis had taken residence in the fort. He walked out of the fort to face the challenge of Kala Yavana. Based on the description of Narada about the conspicuous marks of identification of Krishna, he saw the form of Vishnu in him. Since Krishna was unarmed, Kala Yavana decided not to carry any weapon with him. Krishna intelligently started running with his back towards Yavana. He easily fell into Krishna’s trick and thought he was making an escape. He laughed at Krishna saying he, a cowherd, was shying away from battle like a coward. Chasing with all his might, Yavana found it impossible to lay his hands on Krishna. Following his enemy, he found himself led into a dark cave. Yavana saw a man sleeping whom he mistook for Krishna pretending to be lying with his eyes closed. Since he saw Krishna enter the cave before him and not finding any other exit through which he could have escaped, Yavana concluded that the sleeping man was none other than Krishna. In anger, he kicked the person who lay there. The man disturbed in his sleep opened his eyes. The fiery radiance from his eyes reduced Yavana to ashes.
 

 Kalayavana reduced to ashes
           
            Now, who was this man residing in an uninhabited mountain cave whose immaculate power could kill Yavana? Could he be some kind of illusive creation of Krishna? To clarify all doubts, Bhagavatam gives a flash back of his life
.
            The person sleeping in the cave was Muchukunda by name of the Ikshvaku dynasty and the son of Mandhata. When the celestials were oppressed by the asuras, Indra requested Muchukunda for help. He resigned from all worldly connections and placed himself as the bodyguard of the deities for a long time. When Kartikeya, Shiva’s son, became the commander-in-chief of the celestial army, the deities graciously decided to relieve the faithful Muchukunda from the responsibility. Having lived with the gods for a long time, Muchukunda could not meet his relatives on earth. This was because of the difference in the duration of day and night between the gods and human beings. One day of the gods makes a year on earth. The first six months of the humans are the day’s waking hours of the celestials while the latter six months constitute their night. The two divisions of the gods’ day are called Uttarayana and Dakshinayana respectively.
           
            [In the Mahabharatha war, Bhishma waited for the dawn of Uttarayana to give up his life as it is the auspicious time, when the gods would be awake to bless the person.]        
 
            Blessed by the gods to relax his over worked body through deep sleep, Muchukunda came to the mountain cave. Krishna appeared before him, revealing the divine qualities of Vishnu on his body. Muchukunda was mightily pleased to have a vision of the Lord. Krishna offered him a boon but Muchukunda opted to serve the Lord, instead of returning to the grinding worldly life. Krishna appreciated his attitude of not succumbing to the temptation of boons. Yet, the Lord said he had to take another birth in the world to wash away his sins accrued in the present birth. Despite his pious life, the sins were the result of his killing out of compulsion as a kshatriya and his craze for hunting. The merits of his present good actions, would help him be a brahmana by birth in his next lfe, engaging in pious deeds and show kindness to animals as well. Free from his sins, he would find a place in his abode, emancipated from the cycle of life. Muchukunda went to the mountain Badri in the north and in the temple of Nara-Narayana got engrossed in the meditation of the Lord.
 

Muchukunda sees Krishna in the cave
 
            With the destruction of the Mlecchas who were the army of Kala Yavana, Krishna returned to Mathura with their wealth for distribution among the people. Suddenly they saw a big battalion of soldiers led by Jarasandha approach them. Acting fear, the brothers speedily walked away, dropping all the riches, to appear as escaping from the attack. Jarasandha could not see through the game and was happy at terrorizing Balarama and Krishna. He chased them a long distance until they swiftly vanished into the thick forest of a mountain. Jarasandha scanned through the entire forest but could not locate them anywhere. Struck by the idea to set fire to the whole forest on the mountain, he ordered his army accordingly. The two brothers jumped from a cliff and escaped into the city unperceived. Jarasandha was under the impression that the fire had consumed his enemies. Content at heart, he returned to his kingdom.


Off the cliff