Shukadeva, during his discourse, described the rescue of the earth from the deep waters after a deluge. From the Bhagavad Gita of Krishna we also know that incarnation of the Lord becomes inevitable when righteousness is in danger due to the actions of wicked people. The incarnation of Vishnu as a boar was not only to save the earth sunk under the water but in the process he also killed the demon Hiranyaksha.
 
Svayambhu Manu, sprung from Brahma, wanted to know the ideal way to propitiate the Lord. Brahma said, “Beget worthy sons who would be future rulers.” Manu could not carry out the orders on the vast sheet of water with the earth submerged. Brahma was also in a dilemma to find a solution. Musing over the problem, Brahma noticed a boar in the size of a thumb emerging from his nostril which instantly grew to a gigantic size. The boar dived into the water to rescue the earth from the rasatala by carrying it on his big tusk. Though the boar was none other than the incarnation of Lord Vishnu, before he could carry out the rescue work, he was confronted by a daitya king, named Hiranyaksha. It was a bloody battle between the two. Finally, the demon was killed.
 
Now, it is intriguing as to why and where from this demon suddenly made his appearance to challenge the prowess of the divine boar. So were those listening to the discourse of Shuka. To satisfy their curiosity, Shuka narrated the story of the birth of the twin demon brothers Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha.
 
One day, Daksha’s daughter Diti approached her husband Kashyapa, a brahmarishi and the son of Marichi. She begged him to bless her with an offspring and she made her impatience very obvious in her solicitation. At the end of his daily worship to Lord Vishnu, Kashyapa was absorbed in meditation at dusk. Sadly, Diti had mistimed her request. Sunset is an inauspicious time and Kashyapa asked her to hold her patience. He said, “Dusk is the time when Rudra goes round the worlds, riding his bull. He is in the company of ghosts and is smeared all over by the ashes from the funeral pyres. His three eyes are open to survey all directions and nothing escapes his notice. [Shiva who is believed to have a third eye on his forehead is also known by the name Rudra, indicative of his destructive character]. I do not wish to disrespect the deity by indulging in an unworthy act. Shiva happens to be my brother by marriage to your sister Sati. At a time when even the divinities of the regions are engaged in reciting hymns in Shiva’s praise, I would advise you not to succumb to your desires. Rudra though a Pishacha, is not despised. His commands are carried out with reverence. When such is the situation, transgression on my part would not be excused by him.” But Diti was not to be calmed and she insisted her desire be satisfied at once. Accepting it as the decree of Providence, Kashyapa yielded with due apologies to Lord Hari.
 
In retrospect, Diti was ashamed of herself. Fear of vengeance on her progeny from the short tempered Shiva shook her mentally. She pleaded her husband to save her offspring from evil. Kashyapa, though sorry for his wife, did not wish to keep her in the dark about the truth of her offspring. He told her honestly that by the evil effects of twilight, the hour of Rudra, she was destined to have demons as twin sons. They would oppress all the three worlds unchecked. The Lord of the universe alone would be able to apply a brake to their atrocities. Though she was shocked at first, she realized that death inevitably follows birth. Therefore, her only wish was that her sons despite their wicked nature should meet their death in the hands of Sri Hari. She feared that death caused by a curse or untimely fatal accident would make them an outcaste in their own race in the next birth. Kashyapa consoled her that her grandson Prahlada by one of her sons would be a beacon light to the family. He would compensate by his virtuous life, the evils of Diti’s twin sons. Assurance from her husband thus, was no consolation to save her from the dreadful thought of having demons as sons. She held the embryo within herself for a long time, not allowing it to grow. Yet the unborn did show its destructive nature by eclipsing the sun and moon rays from the earth. The Gods were worried about the consequences of the spreading gloom. They expected some kind of relief on this earth, if the demons were born. Then they would be part of the happenings, good or bad and possibly that would restrain their evil activities. Protected in the womb, now, they were inflicting miseries on the world outside.
 
Diti had been cursed to beget demons. If that was to fructify, correspondingly another curse somewhere had to be uttered. So the Lord, by his own creation, evolved a suitable situation. Jaya and Vijaya were guards at the gate of Vaikuntha, the abode of Vishnu. Their sincere devotion had secured them the coveted status
.
 
                                                              Sages refused entrance
 
Once, some sages had passed through six doors to Vaikuntha without difficulty by the power of yoga. Now at the threshold of the seventh and final door, they wished entry. Sheer self control helped them from being lured by temptations. Constant dedicated thinking had aroused a longing in their hearts for a glimpse of Lord Vishnu. Their tenacious effort had brought them this far. Jaya and Vijaya were suspicious of the identity of the sages and so refused to permit them inside. Further, as if driven by some kind of insanity, they behaved very badly towards the saints. Lashing them with canes, they invited trouble for themselves. The sages were infuriated at the outrageous conduct. They burst out and said, “Your appointment in this holy region is on the basis of your meritorious service to the Lord. But to us, you seem to be unworthy of the honour. You do not even know that the Lord has no enemies in any quarter from whom he need anticipate harm. People attending on the Lord are above the mundane distinctions and discriminations. Your behaviour to us only exposes your spiritual immaturity. We cannot punish you severely as you are the servants of God but we will not let you go without a certain amount of reciprocal treatment for your deplorable action. May you be driven out of Vaikuntha and be born in an unrighteous race dominated by lust, anger and covetessness!” The two guards of Vaikuntha were shrewd enough to understand the implications of the words of the munis. Back to their senses, Jaya and Vijaya fell at their feet and expressed their apologies. They wholeheartedly accepted the curse as punishment for being sinful, inconsistent with their honoured status in the abode of God.
 

 Narayana appears before the sages
 
Hearing the commotion, Lord Vishnu, accompanied by Goddess Lakshmi, came out bare-footed to present himself before the offended ascetics. The sight of his lotus feet for which they had come all the way, appeased the anger of the sages instantly. Wonder struck at the lustrous Lord, the sages pleaded guilty for cursing his followers. They requested the Lord for the withdrawal of the curse or at least to reduce its severity. On the other hand, if the Lord felt that the munis were wrong, they were prepared to bear the punishment awarded by him.
 
The Lord answered, “Since everything has happened at my behest, these two will have to suffer the fated punishment. They must be born as asuras. The demons will ever be obsessed with thoughts about me, arising out of anger. Constant thinking, even though with hatred, would redeem them of the curse in a short span of time. Having carried out their curse for a three term period, they will return to my abode.
 
The story of Jaya and Vijaya provides the background for the birth of the twin demon sons of Diti. Engulfed in fear of the disaster expected to occur, she tried to delay their birth. Realizing that postponing the inevitable was not the solution to the problem, she brought forth the demons after a hundred years. Evil omens were observed all round, sending a shiver in the hearts of people. They assumed gigantic physique which struck universal terror. Their father named them Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha, the former being considered the elder of the two.
 
Hiranyakashipu was very fond of Hiranyaksha who also strived hard to please his affectionate brother. Hiranyaksha, carrying his mace, once went to the portals of heaven with the desire to fight. The sight of him sent all the celestial deities rushing to hide themselves. Not finding any of them even after a thorough search, the asura gave vent to his anger by a terrible roar. He dived deep into the ocean and lived there for many years, scaring the aquatic animals. Varuna, the lord of the waters who had been sighted by Hiranyaksha, was arrogantly invited for a duel. Varuna said, “I have ceased to fight and I see none who can equal you. If you are really keen about a battle, Lord Vishnu is the only one who, in my view, seems to be a suitable opponent for you. He will humble your pride. In the battlefield you will find yourself on the ground surrounded by dogs.” Hiranyaksha, a fool that he was, could not catch the sarcasm laden with subtle meaning in Varuna’s words. Blinded by his sense of superiority in battle, he was exhilarated on finding a person who could be at par with him. He immediately went down to rasatala where he found Lord Vishnu as a boar. The boar put up a sham battle. Both of them were bleeding profusely. The demon thought Vishnu was going to meet his death at his hands. The asura gleefully looked forward to establishing his supremacy, with the gods orphaned at the end of the encounter. Vishnu decided he had given the demon a long rope and it was time to crush him once for all. His sudarshana chakra completed the job. Diti’s heart throbbed but happily her wish was fulfilled. With the demon killed and the earth rescued from under the waters, the Lord went back to his abode, feeling relieved.
 
Hiranyakashipu was depressed over his brother’s death. In order to console his family, he explained to them the philosophy of life. He said, “If a man has not lived through his entire life, he will be safe even in a fierce forest. If his life span has been completed, destiny cannot help him escape death even in a well protected house.”
 
 Hiranyakashipu was ambitious to become a powerful sovereign leader, invincible and ever youthful. He went to the mountain Mandara to engage in a severe austerity to propitiate the lord of creation, Brahma. Standing on the tip of the toe, with arms raised and eyes directed to the sun, he concentrated with the single objective of achieving his ambition. The religious penance was so vigorously performed that fire emitted from his head in all directions. The destructive element upset the equilibrium and the celestial gods were highly agitated. They approached Brahma to help them get out of the difficulty. They said, “You cannot be a passive spectator while this demon is making life in heaven impossible for us. Remedial action is urgently needed before he creates havoc in all regions.” In response to their plea, Brahma went to Hiranyakashipu with a smiling countenance and offered to award the boon of his choice for his tough austerity. Hiranyakashipu enumerated a long list of his aspirations. He said, “Oh Lord! Please grant me immortality against each one of your creations. Let me not die indoor or outdoor, during day or night, through men or animals, animate or inanimate objects or reptiles. Grant me matchless power in battles, undisputed lordship over the guardians of the worlds. Remaining young, I should enjoy all your possessions and luxuries which your asceticism has procured for you.” To avert the disasters as a result of the demon’s penance, Brahma crowned him by sanctioning all his demands.
 
With the extensive power thus obtained, there was no stopping of Hiranyakashipu. Indraloka came under him. Except Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, all other lokapalas were subservient to him. He arrogantly disregarded the shastric ordains and held sway over his ill gotten prosperity for many years. He also indulged in having intoxicating liquor in large quantities. Anxious over the unwarranted suffering, the gods saw Vishnu as the only rescuing power. At the end of their prayers, they heard a voice, the source of which could not be discerned. The voice enthused the gods with confidence and said, “Hiranyakashipu’s days are numbered. I shall soon dispel his illusory notion of being invincible. You should patiently wait. I shall make my appearance at the appropriate time when I will be instrumental to his death.” The gods were happy with the promise and began to believe Hiranyakashipu as already dead.
 
 

Penance of Hiranyakashipu