Chapter 29: Kaliya and his fear of Garuda

 

Kaliya, the many hooded serpent, was residing on the river bed of Kalindi. The venom of the serpent polluted the water and his breath, the air, both hazardous to the inhabitants of Gokula. Krishna decided to provide relief to the people with pollution free air and water. So he climbed a kadamba tree and jumped into the river. Splashing the water as he swam, he created turbulence that angered Kaliya, the serpent king. Excessive spitting of poison darkened the water. The serpent surfaced to attack and coiled round the body of Krishna. He pretended to be helplessly caught in the constricting grip of the serpent. The cowherds were rattled to see Krishna unable to release himself. They swooned as they gave up Krishna as lost. The news spread like wild fire, casting gloom over the Vraja folks. Yashoda and Nanda could not bear to think of living even for a moment without Krishna. Nanda decided to give up his life by jumping into the poisoned water. Though Balarama knew the strength of his brother, he did not try to console anybody. He only stopped Nanda from taking the extreme step. Being the protector of his subjects, he would be demoralizing them by such an act.
 
Krishna decided not to continue the fake alarm any further and came out of the serpent’s hold. Krishna stood on Kaliya’s hood and danced vigorously till it was sore and bleeding heavily. The more poison Kaliya emitted, the more did Krishna sap the serpent’s energy. The battle went on for some time till Kaliya began collapsing, his strength to resist completely depleted. Fearing the end of their husband’s life, his wives pleaded for mercy. They said, “Lord! We are conscious of the wickedness of our husband and also that he has no merit to rely on. Ignorance of the greatness of the Lord has been the cause for all his evil doings. We know how impossible it is to secure the dust of your feet by great saints. Despite the wickedness of our husband, he has been fortunate to have had contact with your feet. You pardon sinful people. Be merciful to our husband also, out of consideration for us. Lord! Please spare our husband’s life.” Krishna instantly obliged them by stepping down from the hood. Kaliya gradually recovered and repented for the cruel life he had been leading. He prayed to Hari and said, “We are by birth evil minded and cannot get rid of our inherent nature. Wickedness has a tight hold over us as evil spirits possess the human beings. You are the best judge to decide whether to shower your grace on us or chastise us for our misgivings to the supremacy of the Lord. Whatever you ordain, we will humbly accept.” On hearing these words, Krishna ordered, “Go to the island Ramanaka in the ocean with your whole family and friends, leaving the river for the cattle and the human beings of Gokula. Moreover, the impression of my feet on your hood would be a deterrent to any attack from Garuda, fearing whom you have been hiding under the water of Kalindi.” The entire serpent family obeyed Krishna and went to the island in the ocean. From that day the water of Yamuna became tasty and sweet.

Kaliya Vanquished
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Interesting Anecdotes

 

Kaliya and Garuda: Garuda was Vinata’s son, while Kaliya was born to Kadru, both by the same father Kashyapa. On the first day of both the dark and the bright fortnights, the serpents were supposed to offer a share of their food to Garuda. It was a settled agreement diligently observed to keep away Garuda and his relatives from attacking the serpents. Once proud of his virulent poison, a strong weapon against his enemies, Kaliya decided to break the agreement. He ate up all the food meant for Garuda. He not only denied the bird, a part of his own food, but also the offerings of the other serpents.
 
            Garuda was infuriated by Kaliya’s default. He started chasing the serpent with the determination to kill him. Kaliya used his venom to stun the bird but it was ineffective. On the other hand, he got a forceful bashing from the left wing of Garuda. To protect himself from the ferocious bird, he took shelter in the water of Kalindi. With what confidence could Kaliya have sought the water of Kalindi as a safe place? The curse on Garuda was a secret known only to Kaliya. Sometime in the past, Garuda was very hungry and wanted to eat the fish in the river. Rishi Shaubari asked Garuda to desist from devouring any of them. The pangs of hunger were so strong that he could not resist. The rishi’s request was ignored and the female fish lamented for the death of their husbands. The rishi was moved by the sorrow of the fish and he pronounced a curse. He banned Garuda’s entry into the river. If Garuda ever ventured into it, he would die. So the river Kalindi was the ideal sanctuary for Kaliya. 
 
            So much for the relationship between Kaliya and Garuda. But the enmity between the serpents and the vultures is an age old story. Kadru always had a hatred for Vinata. She somehow wanted to score over Vinata and humiliate her. Kadru started a controversy over the colour of Ucchaishravas, the celestial horse. This horse was claimed by Bali when it came out during the churning of the ocean and Indra acquired its ownership after his death. They entered into an argument, Kadru saying the horse to be dark and Vinata had no doubt about its white colour. They decided to view the horse directly to ascertain the actual colour. Cunning Kadru said the loser would have to serve the other as a slave. Though Kadru knew the colour of the horse, she wanted to win and have Vinata as her slave. She thought of a deceitful plan. She suggested to Vinata that they view the horse from a distance and the latter unsuspectingly agreed. Kadru sent her sons, the serpents to coil round the horse. As a result the horse looked dark and Vinata had to concede defeat. Vinata became Kadru’s slave. Garuda, the elder brother of Aruna, the sun, was very angry with the foul play. He had to win the nectar from the serpents for Indra to establish his mother’s point and get her released from slavery. To this day the enmity continues and a vulture will never spare a serpent if sighted.

 

 Garuda and Serpent