Pious Nabhaga, son of Manu had an equally pious son named Ambarisha. Ambarisha had relinquished his worldly attachments and was absorbed in the worship of Lord Hari.
 
            Once, Ambarisha and his wife decided to observe the austerity of Dvadashi vow for one whole year. On the final dvadashi day, the king gratified the brahmanas with cows, calves, gold and silver. With adequate care towards serving food to the brahmanas, he was about to break his fast by partaking the remaining food. Just then the great sage Durvasa made his appearance. Ambarisha reverently stood attendance on the learned rishi and made sure there was nothing lacking that might cause him displeasure. As is customary to request a guest to stay on for lunch, Ambarisha extended the courtesy to the sage. Durvasa agreed but he wanted to have his ablution and offer his midday prayers before he sat down for food. To respect an honoured guest, Ambarisha waited for the sage to return so that food could be served to him first before he broke his fast. Time was running out and the stipulated moment to end the vow had almost approached. With just a moment for the dvadashi to be over, Ambarisha was anxious to go through the formalities for the successful completion of the arduous vow. Durvasa was nowhere in sight.
 
The learned brahmanas advised him to have a sip of water which would be a token break of fast and yet not be disrespect to the sage. Just then Durvasa returned and blew his top for the gross insult to him. His notorious short temper was well known and so were his thoughtless curses. He shouted at Ambarisha for his impertinence and said his curse would be a lesson to him for a lifetime. So saying, the ill-tempered sage cut off a lock of his hair. When he was about to pronounce the curse, the lock of hair turned into Vishnu’s sudarshana chakra and started chasing Durvasa. He ran helter-skelter, high and low. Even Brahma and Shiva could not save him. He ran to Vishnu for help. He also expressed his inability to save him from the ravages of his own fiery weapon. He made known to the sage that the welfare of his devotee was foremost to him. Whatever be the source of danger to his devotees, high or low, he cannot tolerate injustice to them was the Lord’s frank reply to the rishi. He said that the rishi would have to fall at his devotee’s feet if he desired to be absolved from the grave cruelty he was about to inflict on Ambarisha. All through the angry scene, Ambarisha stood unshaken like a rock. Durvasa fell at his feet but the humble man said that such a learned person like Durvasa must not subject himself to humiliation. He began to propitiate the sudarshana chakra and pacified it by his prayers. The chakra withdrew from attacking the sage and thus Durvasa’s life was saved.
 
  
Ambarisha pacifies sudarshanachakra
 