Chapter 34: Serpent; Daitya - attack

 

The folks of Vraja including king Nanda propitiated Shiva and Parvati on the banks of river Sarasvati. At the end of the religious rites, they generously offered gifts to the brahmanas. In adherence to the shastric injunctions, they spent the night on the banks of the river, subsisting only on its water.
 
            In the middle of the night when everyone was fast asleep, a hungry large serpent tightly gripped Nanda with an intention to swallow him. Nanda cried for help and the cowherds tried to beat the serpent with burning logs of wood. There was utter mayhem when Krishna came to the spot to find out the cause for the uproar. To the surprise of the onlooking people, the serpent took the form of a resplendent gandharva, the moment Krishna killed it.
 

 Serpent attacks Nanda
           
           Admiring his handsome look, Krishna wanted to know why he had taken the body of a snake. To this the gandharva replied, “I was a gandharva, Sudarshana by name. I was proud of my good looks and prosperity. During my aerial rounds through the heavenly path, I mocked at the great sages Virupa and Angiras. Their ascetic powers punished me with the serpent body. Though it was a very severe blow on me then, I am now grateful to them. But for their curse, I would not have come in contact with the Lord’s feet that have restored my original form, with my sins washed away.” Permitted to go back to his abode of gandharvas, Sudarshana prostrated at the Lord’s feet and formally took leave of Krishna.
           
Shankhyachuda abducts women.
 
Balarama and Krishna were roaming in the forest in a delightful mood. A daitya named Shankhyachuda, suddenly appeared and abducted the women, carrying them to the eastern region. While the brothers were looking on, the daitya tried to behave badly with the women. When they went after him, the demon dropped them like hot potatoes. With Balarama standing guard for the women, Krishna gave the chase with a sala tree [teak tree] in hand. He soon overtook him and a blow with his fist dislodged his head from his shoulders. Removing the jewel he was wearing, Krishna gifted it to his elder brother Balarama as a mark of respect.
 

 Shankhyachuda
 