Chapter 37: Bhakti personified

            Living away from Brindavana for a long time, Krishna became concerned about the welfare of his foster parents whose genuine affection had never made him feel the absence of his real parents. He was also keen on knowing about the gopis, with whom he had a bond of relationship as inseparable as vital air and life. With good tidings and fond enquiries, he sent his dear friend Uddhava, disciple of Brihaspati, to Brindavana. Exhilarated Nanda embraced him with love as if he were Krishna himself. He made kind enquiries of Vasudeva and was anxious to know if the two brothers had happily adjusted to the new environment. In consequence, he hoped that their dear son Krishna had not forgotten him or his mother Yashoda, or the gopis and his cowherd friends, whose thoughts are always pervaded by Krishna. Nanda was overcome with nostalgia, recollecting the memories of their happy association with him who had also been a saviour on many occasions. He told Uddhava that once in a way, he had a doubt flashing across his mind about Krishna never returning to Vraja but he was instantly sure that the endearing boy would not desert them. Uddhava assured Nanda thus, “The universal Being would surely return to Vraja. The Lord who dwells within all human beings is aware of the yearnings of his devotees. His gracious nature satisfies their desires though he is unsullied by any kind of emotional disturbances.”
 
            The next morning, Uddhava was pleasantly surprised with the gopis singing in praise of Krishna keeping the tune and beat in accordance with the sound of churning of curds. The conversation among the gopis and their dedication to Krishna was a revelation to Uddhava. To him they appeared as bhakti personified. Spotting the golden chariot outside Nanda’s mansion, they were intrigued at the sudden appearance of a person whose whereabouts or identity, they could not decipher. They made wild guesses. Their first thought went to Akrura whom they had met earlier. But when Uddhava appeared before them, they were stunned with admiration by his handsome youthful looks. They wondered who he could be, whence he had come or the purpose of his visit. His demeanour and dress, they thought, resembled that of Achyuta. With uncontainable curiosity, they approached Uddhava to get their doubts cleared. As soon as they were told that he had come from Mathura at Krishna’s bidding, their first reaction was a bashful smile with reverence and humility. In excitement, they enquired at the very outset about the well being of their dear Lord.
 

Gopis lament over Krishna's absence
 
            Immediately, feigning anger at Krishna for his prolonged absence, they said, “Krishna has sent you here only to find out about the welfare of his parents. Besides that we do not see any purpose of your visit. Though our thoughts are always running towards Krishna like uncontrolled horses, we have become non-entities as far as he is concerned. Memories of his pranks as a child, his frisking the cowboys to various houses for butter, the music from the divine flute, his dance with us on the moonlit night are fresh in our mind but now we think that the portrayal of so much affection and intimacy with all of us was mere pretence on his part. He has stolen our hearts just the way he stole the butter. If his feelings were genuine, how could he possibly break away from us, not visiting Vraja even once? His new found attraction is the devotion of the women of Mathura that has weaned him from his old dedicated acquaintances. Our life is dragging on mechanically, barren and destitute without him.” After the emotional outburst they could not carry on in the same strain any longer. Their love for Krishna was stronger than the initial spurt of depression which made them say what they did not really mean. They mellowed down and showed their anxiety for his welfare. They were eager to know if Krishna was ever reminded about his wonderful time with them or longed to come back to live in their midst. They told Uddhava that they were waiting for the day when the Lord would give them a chance to serve him again. They asked him to extend their loving invitation to Krishna and that he should make an early visit to revive their happy days. The dust of Vraja had to be sanctified by the feet of the Lord once more. That would give the gopis the satisfaction of living in his company even when he was not with them.
 
            Uddhava had been very proud of his knowledge by his mastery over the scriptural studies. When he heard the gopis speak, he realised that his knowledge was half baked in comparison. These simple women humbled him by the maturity of mind in the understanding of the subtle truth of life’s philosophy and also the greatness of Lord. They needed no scripture to teach them because their intellectual awareness had come to them naturally. They had taught him the meaning and the value of devotion. Uddhava overtly expressed his admiration for their single-minded devotion and complete dedication to Krishna. He felt the steadfast devotion of the gopis had secured the union with the Lord, a privilege not obtainable even after vigorous penances. Uddhava told them their meeting with Krishna was not far away. Even though he was in Mathura, his thoughts were with the gopis. Separation is not cutting asunder the relationship but strengthening the bond of love and devotion. Krishna’s distance from the gopis would only enhance their spiritual proximity. As if reiterating the oft quoted expression, ‘Nearer the temple farther from God’ Uddhava went on to make clear the underlying truth to the gopis. He said that the ecstasy would fade away with continuous association. Just as in real life too, we experience the value of a thing only in its absence. Separation carries the emphatic message that a mixture of good and bad, happiness and sorrow, a combination of opposite experiences enables us to judge one in contrast to the other and help realize the true value. Separation creates yearning of the heart which purifies the mind to keep away from unwanted distractions and directs it to God alone. In the Rasa-Leela, the gopis found Krishna only through the chastening of the mind. When Uddhava wanted to take leave of the gopis, their message for Krishna was, “O Lord! Your social elevation is worth the hand of a princess. We are aware of Pingala’s declaration that the height of happiness is sweetest in disappointment. Yet our craving for you, Krishna, persists with a distant hope of meeting you some day. We are like withered flowers in your absence. Do come and string us together and wear us as your garland vanamala.We wish, whatever be our next birth, our actions should always please you, Lord. We pray you should be a life buoy to our sinking boats.” Uddhava's lecture on the philosophy of life had no impact on the gopis suffering in viyoga (pining in separation). Their life revolved round only love for the Lord and nothing else was of any importance to them. They wanted to be united with the lord whose memories were locked up in their hearts
 
            Uddhava, before leaving Brindavana, revelled on his parting impressions. He was all admiration for the unflinching devotion and the unsophisticated purity of heart of the simple cowherd women. Renouncing all worldly desires, they had boldly overcome the social barriers on the night of the Rasa-Leela for communion with God. While the gopis wanted ever-lasting company of the Lord, Uddhava wanted to be born as plants and trees of Brindavana where one had the picturesque vision of the purity of God’s creation in the persons of the loving gopis. He thought he would be blessed to have association with the dust on which the devout gopis had trodden, they who worshipped the dust of the Lord’s feet.
 