Soma, the moon, was Brahma’s grandson by his son Atri. Since Soma was born from the eyes of Atri, he was full of nectar. Brahma made him the lord of the brahmanas, the heavenly bodies and the deciduous herbs. Winning lordship over these in the three worlds, Soma’s pride and vanity got to his head. He maligned his own character by abducting Tara, wife of Brihaspati. He refused to return her even after repeated requests. This, in turn, led to the perennial fight of the gods and the asuras as Shukracharya, the preceptor of the asuras, elected to support Soma. Indra, with his entire retinue, joined hands with Shiva to fight for Brihaspati. The hostility started a war. Angirasa reported the war to Brahma, who reprimanded his grandson for fighting over the possession of a woman. Soma realised his shameful act and returned Tara to her husband.
 
Brihaspati came to know that Tara was with child. Though he was very bitter about his wife’s infidelity, he thought he would allow her to live because of his desire to have a child. Soon Tara gave birth to a son as lustrous as gold. Again a controversy began as both Soma and Brihaspati claimed to be the father of the child. There seemed to be no end to their verbal clash. Tara observed silence, ashamed to reveal the truth. The boy, though still a child, was annoyed with his mother for her mistake. On top of it, her reluctance to be honest to make a clean breast of the entire incident showed her conceit. He strongly protested against the humiliating embarrassment of not knowing his real father. In private, with Brahma as the mediator, Tara was called upon to be truthful in her confession. Brahma inspired courage in Tara and cajoled her to tell him honestly about the boy’s father. Finally, Tara revealed that Soma was the father. Soma accepted the child with great pleasure and contentment. Thus the child belonged to the lunar race. Brahma christened him Budha, endowed with immense knowledge.
 
Pururava was born to Budha and Ila. He once came across an apsaras named Urvashi, born on earth as a human being, on account of a curse. Pururava was fascinated by the beauty of Urvashi and they both married but soon separated. Pururava could not keep up Urvashi’s condition agreed upon at the time of their marriage. Urvashi then left for the region of the gandharvas. As if out of mind, Pururava, wailing aloud, went round in search of his dear lost wife. It was a pleasant surprise for him to see Urvashi, near the field of Kurukshetra, enjoying herself with her maids on the banks of river Sarasvati. Pururava approached her and poured his heart out. He sobbed, “O you cruel lady! How could you abandon me without consideration for my feelings? I am exhausted and depleted in strength, searching for you. I might fall on the ground any moment as prey to wild animals. It’s in your hands to revive me on compassionate grounds.” Touched by his pathetic cry, Urvashi consoled him with the assurance that she would oblige him with her company once a year and bear his sons. Gratified by her words, Pururava enjoyed with her every year. Once, she was pregnant and he was sorry to leave her in that condition. When he returned the next year, she was the mother of a handsome hero. At the time of parting every year, he had to tear himself from her. Urvashi then advised him to pray to the gandharvas to return her to him.
 
Pururava did accordingly and received a fire pot from them. They said he could reach Urvashi if he propitiated the pot. Love smitten Pururava thought the pot to be Urvashi. Truth dawned on him when he embraced the pot as if he was hugging her. He left the pot in the forest and went to his capital, still unable to get his thought of Urvashi out of his mind.
 
The three Vedas, representing the rituals, flashed across the mind of Pururava. Earlier, there was only one Veda in the form of pranava, the mystical Om; Lord Narayana, was the only God; one caste called the Hamsas existed; and one fire was known. Pururava was responsible for the three forms of fire, called Ahavaniya, the Garhapatya and the Dakshinagni. He made the diversification of the fire possible in his attempt to reach Urvashi. He went to the place in the forest where he had left the fire pot. In its place he found a banyan tree grown out of a shami tree. He cut out a couple of aranis, pieces of wood from the odd combination of the two trees. One he visualized as Urvashi and the other as himself. He imagined a third intervening stick which he conceptualised as their son. He rubbed the two sticks in his hands as per the instruction in the sacred text to produce fire. The friction caused the eruption of a flame, called the Jataveda, indicating that things are produced by their own energy. Pururava adopted the fire in its three forms as his son. His son, the fire, finally, united Pururava and Urvashi.