Chapter 26: Miraculous Feats

 

Parikshit, listening to the greatness of Lord Hari, expressed his desire to know more about the fascinating feats of the Lord, in his incarnation as Krishna, the son of Vasudeva. Every incarnation is to eradicate evil by the death of wicked people. In Vamanavatara, the Lord took the stature of a dwarf to achieve his purpose but had to grow into a gigantic person to accomplish the difficult task of punishing the wrong doer. As Rama in another incarnation, he was a youth when he killed the ten headed Ravana. In his appearance as Krishna what could be so impressive as to draw the interest of people to hear his achievements? The outstanding feature was his miraculous feats even as an infant and his brave act, as a young child, was killing of Kamsa who was a dangerous man without morals or ethics in life. By reducing the number of wicked people, he also lessened the burden of earth.
 
             On the first birthday of Krishna, his foster parents Nanda and Yashoda were engaged in honouring the brahmanas performing the religious rites for the longevity of the child. In the grand celebration, the cowherds with their families were invited to participate. An elaborate lunch was served. At that moment, Yashoda noticed Krishna dozing off to sleep. She put him comfortably under a cart and busied herself attending to the guests. In the hustle and bustle, Krishna’s cry of hunger was drowned. Throwing up a tantrum, he started kicking his legs which hit the cart hard to send it flying high. It returned to the ground with a resounding thud alarming everybody. They were in dismay to see the cart in pieces. They could not believe that a one year old would be capable of so powerful an act, though the Vraja boys tried to convince the elders that they had seen him do it. Benedictory rites were carried out to ward off ill effects on the child. However, it is believed that Kamsa had sent a demon as the cart to crush the child under its wheels. This incident is often referred to as Shakatasura vadha, the killig of the asura as shakata [cart]. The famous Tamil saint poetess Andal has mentioned this story in her Tiruppavai.
 
            Putana’s death was a big jolt to Kamsa. Reflecting on what Devaki’s daughter had said about the enemy being born elsewhere, Kamsa tried to associate her words with the infant that killed the demoness. With the conviction that the infant was none other than Vishnu, who alone could overpower Putana, Kamsa began to hatch his evil plans directly against Krishna. Next, asura Trinavarta obliged Kamsa in his mission. One day, Yashoda was fondlig her son on her lap. Suddenly, the weight of the child became unbearable. So she put him on the ground. An unforeseen whirlwind arose, throwing up a massive cloud of dust, followed by a blinding darkness. It created lot of commotion and confusion. People lost the whereabouts of each other. Trinavarta, finding it very convenient, carried away the child high into the sky. The velocity of the wind was so great that by force people got aimlessly scattered without any sense of direction. Yashoda could not locate her son anywhere and she sat down depressed, crying for her lost child. The maidens were equally sorry for the missing Krishna for he was as dear to them as to Yashoda. They took it as a personal loss. The fierce wind subsided after sometime but the melancholy depression that came over due to Krishna’s disappearance was worse than the storm. Initially, the asura went high with great fervour but began slackening due to the steady increase in the child’s weight. Krishna clasped his arms tightly round the asura’s neck and would not let go his hold however much the choked demon tried to get released. Like a deflated balloon, the demon with Krishna descended speedily to the ground and crashed against a rock that killed him at once. Krishna was safe clinging to the asura. Krishna’s escape spread a sigh of relief. They were thankful to Providence for the great mercy shown on them. They were sure that they owe their gratitude to someone whose meritorious deed had secured the divine benevolence to save their dear child.
 
            While still an infant, Krishna revealed his divinity to Yashoda as she caressed him after his feed. Krishna opened his mouth in a sleepy yawn. Yashoda was surprised to view the entire universe, the earth, the firmament with the galaxy of stars and planets inside his mouth. She closed her eyes in fear but Krishna provided her a similar bewildering experience as a toddler. His friends complained to Yashoda about his eating mud and she chided him looking into his mouth by force. With an innocent countenance, he opened his mouth wide for his mother to have a full view inside. Yashoda witnessed a repeat performance of the earlier extraordinary vision. She was confused whether it was a dream or an illusion. The wonderful experience took her to a higher level of consciousness, beyond the mundane relationship with Krishna, as mother and son. She saw herself as a humble devotee before the Supreme Lord. Full of reverence, she offered her obeisance to him in the ecstasy of her communion with God. After a momentary experience of the supernatural, she was back again as an affectionate emotional mother embracing her son.
 
The endearing son of Yashoda never provoked her anger with his childlike pranks in the company of other cowherd boys in Vraja. He would let loose the calves when there was nobody to supervise. The calves would drink up all the milk and leave the udders drained. When the cowherds came for milking the cows, they would not yield any milk. Krishna was very fond of butter and curds. He would go from house to house stealing it. If the pots were hung high on a peg, he used to pile up logs of wood to reach it or his friends would bend over each other to form a pyramid for Krishna to climb. The catapult was a handy weapon to knock a hole in the pots through which the milk or curd would flow out enabling Krishna to enjoy a liberal helping with his friends. The other maidens enjoyed the child’s mischief. Without malice they would discuss about Krishna’s mischiefs in the hearing of Yashoda or directly talk to her jokingly about their difficulty in managing this sprightly boy.
 
There is yet another episode which will make an interesting reading. Once, Yashoda was churning out butter, when Krishna pulled her upper garment to indicate his hunger. Just then the milk on the hearth was about to boil over. To save the milk, she hastened to remove it from fire. Krishna was annoyed with his mother for not giving preference to his need. He broke the pot and started eating the butter sitting on a mortar. When Yashoda returned, she was amused to see him happily eating the butter, his face smeared with it. But she was angry to find him feeding the monkeys also through the window. She picked up a rod to spank him. Nimble as he was, he ran around with Yashoda chasing him but he always escaped her reach. After enjoying the fun, teasing his mother for sometime, he decided to give in. With an apologetic look on his face, he coaxed his mother to throw away the rod. Intent on punishing him, she tried to tie the boy to the mortar with a rope. Surprisingly, any extension of the rope always fell short of two finger length. Yashoda refused to accept defeat and she persisted in her attempt even though exhausted. The tired look on her face forced Krishna to please her again. She tied him to the mortar with the rope round his waist. The rope made an impression on his belly, which gave him the name Damodara [tied round the stomach]. Thinking him to be well secured from any further mischief, she went to attend to the household work. No sooner was she out of sight, than Krishna crawled to a pair of trees nearby, dragging the heavy mortar along. 
 
The two trees, named Jamala and Arjuna, have a history to their existence. In their previous birth, they were the sons of Kubera, the god of wealth. Then their names were Nalakubera and Manigriva. They were great devotees of Rudra. Spoilt by excessive wealth, they swindled it in indulging in uncontrolled drinking. In a drunken state they would engage in sports with the gandharva damsels in the river Ganges and in the gardens of mountain Kailasha. Overpowered by pride of wealth, they failed to be respectful to sage Narada when he once came to the banks of the river. The maidens tried to cover themselves, out of respect and fear. Indifference to the holy sage subjected the youths to his curse. Finding them degenerated to a deplorably low character, the sage wished to mend their manners with suitable punishment. He wanted them to realise that pride of prosperity would lead a person astray from the righteous path, and suffer the misfortune as a criminal. He cursed them to have an immovable form in their next birth. The considerate sage put a limit of a hundred celestial years, when Lord Krishna would redeem them. Spiritual knowledge would reinstate them in their celestial position but at that time, they would be the devotees of Sri Hari.
 
Jamala and Arjuna were the trees in consequence of the curse. As Krishna went between the trees, he had to forcibly squeeze the mortar through. The two trees were uprooted and razed to the ground. A couple of radiant persons emerged from within. Their pride had disappeared without trace and they bowed to Krishna. With the turn in their attitude, they sang the praises of the Lord and returned to their celestial habitation as sons of Kubera. The message of Narada was, ‘Ignorance of the Lord binds one to evil while devotion to him breaks the fetters of sin and grants blissful freedom to the soul.’   
 

 Krishna redeems Kubera sons