Hiranyakashipu’s son Prahlada was a great devotee of Sri Hari. At the age of five, his intellectual and spiritual maturity was commendable. Quiet by nature, he was not fascinated by the worldly temptations nor did he show any interest in playing with the children. He did not nurture enmity towards anybody, a characteristic contrary to the innate quality of a daitya. Drawn by his devotion to the Lord, he would sometimes go into a trance. Hiranyakashipu tried his best to divert Prahlada to his ways of wicked living, by putting him as under study to the sons of Shukracharya. They failed in their efforts as Prahlada was guided by the belief that all are the children of God without discrimination. Hiranyakashipu employed various people to find his source of spiritual learning. Prahlada’s intelligent reply bowled them out. He said, “Just as iron filings are attracted towards a magnet, so am I drawn to the Almighty Chakrapani [weilder of the discus.]. Hence my mind works differently from yours.” Prahlada patiently bore the severe lashings with canes. Though his father felt that keeping him in isolation would reform him, it proved to be an added convenience for the young boy to think of God without disturbance. When questioned about the best quality learning he has had, Prahlada boldly replied, “Devotion to Lord Vishnu, meditating, finding immense pleasure in the service of God, getting engrossed in reciting his glories are the best teachings life has taught me.”
 
Hiranyakashipu concluded from Prahlada’s speech that he was carrying the guilt of his uncle’s death as he found the boy an accomplice of his father’s enemy, Vishnu. Unable to draw him away from the Lord, he decided that taking Prahlada’s life was the only way to get rid of this millstone round his neck. He tried to kill his son through snake bite, setting an elephant to trample over him, pushed him down a mountain, and exposing him to severe climatic conditions. He even resorted to poisoning his food. But Prahlada escaped all of his father’s wicked conspiracies. His communion with God through meditation continued as usual. Hiranyakashipu began to foresee self destruction by continuous enmity with his son. The sons of Shukracharya built up his confidence by saying that a boy of his age could not pose any danger. However, they suggested the boy be bound with varuna’s noose till the return of their father, Shukracharya. They also expected him to reform with age.
 
Prahlada imparts spiritual instruction to the Daitya boys. 
           
One day, there was some leisure in the absence of the preceptor. The boys began playing. Prahlada called his friends to initiate them with regard to the spiritual, more enlightening aspect of life than the transient happiness of the world. Still in the tender age when their minds could be easily moulded, the boys showed great interest. Prahlada started instruction by pointing to them that they were fortunate to be born as humans. Hence they should not waste it in trivial pleasures which would lead to ceaseless births and deaths.    
 
The wise should seek the lotus feet of the Lord for everlasting bliss of emancipation. He went on to explain the various segments of life in a lucid way to clear their cloudy minds. He said, “A man’s life span is one hundred years. Of this, half the time he wastes in sleep due to exhaustion from ignorant indulgence in worldly pleasures. The charms of childhood and early youth rob twenty years of the remaining half. Nothing can be achieved in old age when infirmity and senility set in. Another twenty years are lost there. The balance of only ten years is all that is left for us to spend constructively in the thought of God. This too we fritter away in trying to provide comfort and luxury for a happy family life. Then where is the time for the worship of the Lord? We let slip the real happiness which lies in the renunciation of the worldly connections and serving the divine feet.” The boys were awe stricken at the enormous knowledge of Prahlada. They were curious to know how he had managed to learn so much at such a young age. Prahlada narrated to them that he had learnt it from Narada while he was in his mother’s womb.
 
            Prahlada began his story to convince the boys about the authenticity of what he had told them a little while ago. He started, “My father went to the mountain Mandara to perform arduous penance to please Brahma. Availing his absence, the celestials planned to wage war against the Danavas [demons]. Indra, who had lost to my father, wanted to wipe out the demons, expectantly hoping that the daitya king would die unable to withstand the strenuous austerity. In the war, the demons deserted their wives and children to save their own lives. Indra abducted my mother and was carrying her to heaven. Narada advised him to let her go as she was another man’s wife. Indra said he would keep her in his custody till she gave birth to his enemy’s child growing in her womb. Until that child was killed, Indra feared his position would be in danger. Narada then advised him not to entertain such cruel thoughts against an infant, the devotee of Vishnu. As a mark of respect to Narada, Indra freed my mother and she was taken care of by the sage in his hermitage. My mother served him with reverence. She wished for the easy birth of her child and a safe life thereafter. The divine sage granted both her wishes. He instructed her about the value of spiritual pursuit as well as the real nature of religion. I heard this from my mother’s womb. Due to lapse of time and age, my mother is not able to recollect the sage’s teachings but it is there in my memory, fresh as if I heard it just yesterday. This is the truth behind my knowledge. My friends! If you trust my words, give up your ego. Yogic exercises terminate the actions that lead to desire and misery. Direct your aspirations towards the Almighty with honest attachment. This, the learned consider as real happiness. Other pleasures are mere mockery to which we should not become slaves.”
 
            There was a marked impact on the minds of the boys who began to follow the teachings of Prahlada. Observing this, the preceptors informed the king about the overpowering influence of his son on other students. Hiranyakashipu abused his son as the traitor of the family. Panting heavily he burst out at Prahlada, “You ill-mannered wretch! You have asserted that your Supreme Being is more powerful than I am. With that confidence, you arrogantly transgress my commands. Let him now save you from the jaws of death. If, as you say, he is all pervading, can you prove he is in this pillar?” So saying he hit the pillar with his mace. Instantly, there was a loud rumbling sound of deafening intensity which rattled even the gods. Out of the pillar emerged a fierce strange form that had a head of a lion and a human body.
 
            Vishnu obviously took this form, called Narasimha [a combination of man and lion], which was outside the exemptions Hiranyakashipu had secured from Brahma as protection from death. Narasimha prolonged the encounter for some time till the demon lost himself to the impression of being the victor. His pride led to the loss of his sense of reasoning. Piling abuses on the Lord, he hastened his death and so had the time approached for Vishnu to fulfill his promise to the gods. It was dusk when Narasimha placed the demon on his lap at the threshold of the court room. His claw like nails ripped open the abdomen and he pulled out the entrails, and wore it like a garland round his neck. With blood splashed all over his face, the lion man looked dreadful. The way the Lord killed the demon did not include any of those sanctions the demon had obtained. The time was dusk, neither day nor night; the place was the doorstep, not indoor or outdoor; the weapon was the nails of the unusual creature and the lion-man was not any of Brahma’s creations.
 
           Even after he had slain the demon, Narasimha’s terrible roar indicated that his anger had not appeased. The gods apprehended disaster when, seated on the throne, the ferocious lion man was still continuing his awe inspiring roar. They tried to calm him with songs of praise but it was of no avail. Prahlada was then asked to sing the glories of the Almighty. Gradually the anger decreased by degrees. The Lord pleased with Prahlada, offered him a boon. Prahlada was not to be tempted as he was beyond the worldly desires. He, however, requested the grant of a small wish. He said, “I am aware of the impious sinful life my father has lead. Yet, as a special favour, I beg you to wash his sins away and pardon him.” Admiring the boy’s selflessness, the Lord told him, “Your father has already been redeemed by your birth. He himself has been constantly thinking about me though with hatred. Even people disposed towards me as your father receive my blessings.” Thus Narasimha disappeared. Prahlada was crowned the king who ruled as a righteous rulers for many years.
 
         
Narasimha kills Hiranyakashipu

            Thus Jaya and Vijaya fulfilled the first phase of the brahmanas’ curse. In the next birth they were Ravana with ten heads and his brother Kumbhakarna who were klled by the Lord in his incarnation as Rama. Finally, they were born as Shishupala and Dantavaktra, who were the victims of Krishna.

 

 

 

Interesting Anecdotes

Goddess Lakshmi : Goddess Lakshmi, an embodiment of sympathy and compassion has a special place next to the heart of Sri Hari. After the death of Hiranyakashipu, she stepped down from the honoured place in protest. Not knowing the cause for Lakshmi’s decision to forsake him, Vishnu was perplexed. He requested her to reveal the reason for abandoning him. She said, “My faith in your mercy has fallen by your treatment of Hiranyakashipu. You never gave him a chance to reform. Prompted by your anger, you mercilessly killed him. Should you not have helped him to conquer his mental aberration? You should endeavour to kill the evil and not victimize the person who is wicked due to ignorance.” Narasimha realized his folly and promised to be careful in future, not to impose outright punishment without trial. Pleased with the Lord’s promise, she compromised to sit on his lap. That is why we find her on Lord’s lap in the Narasimhavatara. This was a trial for the Lord himself to convince Lakshmi that reformation would be the first step before convicting an erred man to capital punishment. Thus in his birth as Rama, he could have killed Ravana when he had lost his army, weapons and even his chariot. But Ravana was sent back at the end of the day, to reconsider his attitude towards Sita. Krishna also upheld his promise to his aunt to pardon Shishupala till he committed one hundred sins.