Chapter 50: Shiva is saved

           From time immemorial, intellectuals had been pondering over a very puzzling question. Dharmaputra Yudhishthira was struggling to find a convincing answer to the same question. The million dollar question was, “Those who propitiate Shiva easily enjoyed the pleasure of prosperity, while the devotees of Vishnu had to struggle. The two deities Shiva and Vishnu are diametrically opposed to each other. Shiva is the god of destruction while Vishnu is the protector but their favours on their devotees are contrary to their character. Why is it so?” The explanation for this is, Shiva is easily susceptible to the prayers of his devotee. His ego has various attributes and even if one of these receives special attention, he feels exalted. Prompt comes the grant of a boon offering worldly luxuries. Parallel to this is the angry aspect of Shiva. He does not tolerate the slightest folly and a curse is pronounced outright. Vishnu, on the other hand is the Supreme Purusha beyond the influence of Prakriti tandem with the transient aspects of creation and life. Krishna gives a lucid explanation to Yudhishthira, “Brahma and Shiva have a highly volatile temper which can be emotionally manipulated favourably or otherwise without much effort. Whatever be their reaction to the actions of the devotees, it is only in relation to worldly matters. Shankara’s boons lead to more entanglement in actions and increase the possibility of subjecting us to his anger or pleasure. A boon or curse cannot be retrieved or made ineffective.
 
 “I confer favours in an entirely different manner. My efforts are aimed at drawing my devotees away from any kind of involvement with the material world. When the mind is trained to evolve an attitude of detachment, emotional gratification or disappointment has no meaning and mental cravings become non-existent. Relatives and friends are only fair weather friends. They would offer no consolation or encouragement at times of need. Besides, they would prefer distancing themselves to avoid obligation. Association with pious people will stand in good stead and help rise above the apparent changes in circumstances unaffected. There will be spiritual bliss, reaching you to the highest abode free from rebirth.”
 
            There is an ancient popular story describing how Shiva was cornered by Vrikasura by granting him a boon. One day, Vrika asked sage Narada as to who could be easily propitiated among the trinity- Brahma, Shiva or Vishnu. Narada advised him to propitiate Shiva for effortless success.
 
Vrika engaged himself in pleasing Shiva by burning his own flesh in the sacrificial fire. He got desperate as there was no sign of the god showing any favour. Disappointed at his failure, he was about to chop off his head with a sword, when Shiva rose from the sacrificial fire and stopped him from committing suicide. Shiva restored the flesh to Vrika’s body and told him, he was pleased even if his devotees offered plain water with sincerity. There was no need to torture ones body to seek his blessings. He asked him what he would like to have as a boon. The wicked asura was delighted and asked for the most evil boon. He said, “Let instant death come to the man on whose head I place my palm.” Shiva was shocked to hear the treacherous wish but could not go back on his promise. With a forced smile on his face, he said, “Be it so.”
 

  Shiva grants boon to Vrikasura
 
Having received the boon, Vrika exposed his ungrateful nature and rushed to test its potency on Shiva himself. A vigorous chase followed while all the gods were tense about the serious consequence that might be in store for Shiva. Shiva, unable to tackle the asura, resorted to Vishnu in Vaikuntha. Vishnu, as a brahmachari clad in black deer skin, holding a staff, approached Vrika, and was over solicitous to him with his kind words. He said, “O son of Shakuni! You seem so exhausted and fatigued. It appears you have come a long way with an important goal in mind. Or else you would not have taken the trouble. Please relax and allay your tired nerves. Later, if you please, you may tell me the purpose of your exertion.”
 
Vrika was taken in by the bramachari’s concern for him. Vrika confided in him all that transpired between him and Shiva as well as the reason for the hot chase. With sarcasm and mockery in his voice, the bramachari said, “How could you believe the words of Shiva who is the Lord of goblins and evil spirits? O king of the danavas! I never expected you to be so naïve to have faith in a person who has assumed the form of a Pishacha after a friction with the preceptor of the world, Prajapati Daksha. That there is no truth in what he has said can be proved by placing your palm on your own head. Once Shiva is proved to be a lier, you can deal with him in a way that will not give him another opportunity to wag his tongue in falsehood.” These convincing words fooled Vrika and without a moment’s hesitation, he placed his palm on his head. Before he knew what was happening, his head smashed into thousand pieces. That was Vrika’s entry into, and Shiva’s exit from, the jaws of death.