Arjuna’s son Abhimanyu was treacherously killed by the Kauravas when he got caught in the chakravyuha, an intricate formation of the army, far above the comprehension of common intelligence. While Abhimanyu was in his mother’s womb, Krishna was explaining to his sister this mazelike confusing technique. Subhadra fell asleep when Krishna’s narration had reached only as far as the entry into the formation. The next stage, the knack of escaping from it could not be continued. Therefore Abhimanyu had grasped what he had heard while in the womb. With that limited knowledge he braved his way into the chakra. He was seriously hurt, unable to free himself from his enemies. The war convention was not to kill a wounded soldier. But the Kauravas, unmindful of the moral ethics of war, massacred the youth. Though the boy’s loss was like a thunderbolt on the Pandavas who had been facing a series of miseries, there was, however, a silver lining to the dark clouds. Uttara was with Abhimanyu’s child saved by Krishna’s sudarshana chakra, from the unfailing weapon darted out by Ashvatthama. But for Krishna’s benevolence the Pandavas had almost lost the scion of their family. The golden shield of Krishna was an additional safeguard for the embryo.  Here then was their progeny destined to carry on the lineage.
 
The foetus encased in the divine shield had a vision of the Supreme Lord. Just the size of a thumb, the Lord appeared in radiant garments of golden hue. His two pairs of arms extended up to his knees, not known to be found among human beings. He gets the epithet of ‘ajanubahu’ for this exclusive attribute. Before the unborn child could comprehend the vision, it disappeared.
 
Uttara soon gave birth to a boy on an auspicious day with favourable signs. The learned priests named him Vishnurata i.e. Vishnudatta, meaning given by Vishnu. They predicted that he would be the flag bearer of his reputed great grandfather king Pandu. They also said he would be an embodiment of piety, ever striving to establish good over evil.
 
Vishnudatta grew up to become an ardent devotee of Sri Hari. He was always looking into everyone, hoping to see the divine person of the vision he had as an embryo. He was for this reason called Parikshit, the seeker, a name that stuck to him and the original name was almost forgotten. Ably guided by his grandparents, the stature of Parikshit grew like the waxing moon. Confident that the kingdom was in safe hands, the Pandava brothers with Draupadi retired to the north to attain the lotus feet of Hari through penance.
 
Vyasa introduces an allegoric story into the narration. Instead of following the beaten track of speaking volumes about the greatness of the king, he does it with some   novelty. He starts a conversation between piety and earth. Piety has been personified as a crippled bull on one leg. The earth as a cow is whipped by Kali in the guise of a prince.            
 
To understand the story, one has to know the history of the yugas of creation. Life on earth has passed through four yugas. The first one was the satya yuga pervaded by virtues alone without any trace of evil. Slowly evil began to creep in and spread over one fourth of the earth heralding the treta yuga. The third yuga was the dvapara considered the blessed one when Krishna, Devaki’s son was born to maintain the equilibrium between evil and virtue. After Krishna’s disappearance from earth, Kali the evil reigned supreme spreading its wings far and wide. Kali yuga is the present age we have been born in. It brought piety on its last leg, having broken the other three as represented by the bull. The earth as the cow appears to have lost her calf who was none other than Krishna. The cow poured out her heart to the bull about her suffering. With the advent of Kali, the earth had been infested, as it were, by an epidemic. The fertile lands had lost their greenery. People performed their duty with not only dishonesty but also insincerity. Lethargy was the order of the day. The learned no longer commanded any respect. Even nature rebelled at the moral degeneration through famine, drought and poverty. The cow said the bull was suffering the crippled condition because Krishna the protector was no more.
 
 
 Kali begs pardon
 
Parikshit, in the course of his conquering expedition to establish his sovereignty, overheard this conversation. He also witnessed how Kali was severe on the cow. He flew into a rage to realize the enormous extent of injustice prevalent in his kingdom. In the land where Arjuna had enjoyed the support of Krishna and the Pandavas were renowned for their righteousness, Parikshit could never allow Kali to prosper. He lifted his sword to kill the villain. Kali, coming out of his disguise, fell at the king’s feet begging for mercy. The just king desisted from killing a person who had surrendered. He vanquished Kali from his kingdom and made him the king of gambling dens, drinking pubs and poverty. In short he was to head all that was undesirable and immoral. He restored the legs of the bull in the form of meditation, purity and kindness. The lost glory of the earth came back to her and she enjoyed peace.
 

Interesting Anecdotes

Abhimanyu: There is another version to the story of Abhimanyu. According to that, Arjuna had taught his son Abhimanyu only the technique of entry into the chakravyuha and had not completed the instruction. In the war front, the boy was inspired to enter the chakravyuha by Yudhishthira with the assurance that he would rescue him. But as ill luck would have it, Yudhishthira could not follow the boy into the formation to save him. Arjuna would have definitely saved his son but the Kauravas cunningly whisked him away to engage him in another encounter. Yudhishthira was immensely grieved to witness the life of a promising hero and a valiant warrior cut short. He felt guilty for his wrong advice though it was not with any malice. He was bold enough to own up the fault. Like Yudhishthira, we should have the courage to own our mistake honestly and never try to cover it. It was, however, a severe blow for all the Pandavas.

Pandavas and Kauravas: Krishna’s life was mostly revolving round the Pandavas, his favourites. The wicked ways of the Kauravas, with no concern for justice, drove him to be unsympathetic towards them. Now it is important to know a little about these two families, the main rivals in the Mahabharatha war.

The complication in the pious king Dilipa’s dynasty started with his grandson king Santanu. Ganga, the sacred river, was strolling on the banks in the form of a beautiful woman. Santanu was attracted by the pretty woman and wished to marry her. Ganga put forth a condition to Santanu that he should never question her actions. The day a friction arose on that account she would leave him for good. The king agreed and they got married. This agreement was necessary, for Ganga had to redeem the Vasus who had been cursed by Vashishtha for stealing the sacred cow Nandini, daughter of the wish yielding cow Kamadhenu. Of the eight Vasus, seven of them were only accomplice to the crime. The main Vasu, who planned the theft to satisfy his wife’s desire to have the cow, was the most sinful of the lot. They were born as the sons of Ganga by Santanu. The first seven she threw into the river as soon as they were born to redeem them from the curse. Santanu patiently witnessed his sons being drowned in the water because questioning was taboo according to the contract. But when she was going to do the same with the eighth son, it was the end of his endurance. Santanu’s emotions took the better of him with a vehement outburst at Ganga’s cruelty. With the contract broken, Ganga decided to leave. This child, the last of the Vasus, was the guilty person destined to live for many years as the curse was mainly directed to him. She took the child and promised to nurture his personality to develop to perfection in every conceivable field of knowledge. When she was satisfied with his all round achievement, she returned the well trained boy to his father. He was named Devavrata.         

 
            Santanu again got involved with a fisherwoman, Satyavati. Her beauty drew him to desire for marriage. The promise the girl’s father wanted was to anoint the son born to his daughter as the king after him. Santanu refused to enter into such a contract because Devavrata, so dear to his heart, was the legitimate successor to the throne. The son was upset to see his father depressed. He secretly found out from the king’s charioteer that his father was pining for his lady love, unable to accept the marriage demands of the fisherman. Devavrata proceeded to the fisherman to promise him that he would abdicate the throne for Satyavati’s son. But the fisherman had another problem. He said that his grandson would still not be sure of his position. A son born to Devavrata would be the legal heir to the throne, which would make his grandson’s claim invalid. Devavrata declared that he would take a vow of celibacy which would eliminate that hurdle too. He gave his word never to conduct himself in any way that would create further complication. Thenceforth, he became Bhishma, a name given to him by people for his vow of celibacy that required tremendous mental strength. In appreciation of his son’s great sacrifice, Santanu blessed him, enabling Devavrata to choose the time of his death.
 
 
Bhishma's oath of celibacy
 
             Here is an interesting flash back to Satyavati’s life. A certain king was away from his wife when he developed an urge to have a child. He sent his vital energy to his wife through an eagle. In a fight with another eagle, the vital energy in the beak dropped into the river. A fish swallowed it, from which a boy and a girl came out. A fisherman carried the infants to a king who adopted the boy and sent the girl back with him. She was Satyavati, who grew as the fisherman’s daughter. She grew up as a pretty woman but unfortunately she had the fish odour emanating from her body. She used to ferry people across the river in her boat. One day, she was rowing rishi Parashara across when he expressed his wish to have a child by her. Parashara took her to a secluded island, created a fog by his yogic power for privacy and had a son, whose conception and birth, all happened in one day. The dark child was named Krishna Dvaipayana. The sage replaced the pungent fish smell by a sweet fragrance that spread to the distance of a yojana. So the name Yojana-gandha. He also restored her virginity. Parashara educated his son in all sciences of knowledge. He was popularly called Veda Vyasa, in short as Vyasa. Vyasa promised his mother before leaving her that he would appear whenever she thought of him in times of need. Also, we always find Vyasa as an actively important character when difficult situations needed his participation, besides being the script writer of the epic Mahabharatha and the Puranas.
 
With Bhishna eliminated from the claim to the throne, Satyavati’s sons Chitrangada and Vichitravirya found their road clear. Fate was against the success of Satyavati’s plans. Chitrangada was killed by a gandharva of the same name even before he was married. Bhishma went to the svayamvara of Amba, Ambika and Ambalika, the daughters of the king of Benares [now Varanasi] and abducted them as brides for Vichitravirya. Amba refused to marry him as she was already committed to another man. But that king Salva rejected her on the ground that she had been carried away to another man’s house. For damaging her prospects of a married life, Amba vowed to be the cause of Bhishma’s death. She did win over Bhishma in the Kurukshetra war, when she appeared as Shikhandi. She had interchanged her form with a yaksha and bravely faced Bhishma. At the very first sight Bhishma could see through Shikhandi and identified him as Amba. Since he had determined not to fight against a woman, he dropped his weapons and surrendered.
 
Ambika and Ambalika married Vichitravirya. Soon he was struck by some serious ailment which resulted in his dying childless. Satyavati was defeated in her attempt to crown one of her sons and she had also foiled the chances of Bhishma. Moreover, her daughters-in-law were childless widows. Satyavati was very depressed to find her husband’s dynasty bereft of an heir. The thought of Vyasa suddenly came to her, on whom she could depend during distress. In a moment, Vyasa stood before her as promised, and agreed to father the sons of Satyavati’s daughters-in-law. Ambika closed her eyes when she saw the bearded dark sage. Dhritharashtra, the blind son was born to her. Ambalika got the frail albino Pandu for a son as she turned pale with fear on seeing Vyasa. Not satisfied both times, Satyavati requested Ambika to take a second chance. Ambika, posing to be agreeable to the suggestion, sent her maid servant instead. She served Vyasa with devotion and sincerity. The result was, she bore Vidura the most intelligent, thoughtful and well poised son. Satyavati came to know of this only after Vyasa had left.
 
            Dhritharashtra married Gandhari. Gandhari conceived at the same time as Kunti, Pandu’s wife. Kunti’s son Yudhishthira was born on time, while Gandhari eagerly waited for her child. But it did not happen, extending very much beyond the stipulated date which frustrated her. In anger, she hit her stomach hard with her hands and the long exasperating suspense was over. To her utter disappointment, out jumped a mass of flesh with the impact of the hit. In great fury, Gandhari called upon sage Vyasa and said, “See for yourself what I have borne. You have belied me by your false prediction that I was destined to have a hundred sons.” Vyasa consoled her not to despair. He said there was no falsehood in what he had told her. He said she was sure to have that many sons. He asked her to bring one hundred and one pots. He sprinkled water on the mass of flesh which at once divided equally into a hundred and one pieces. Clarified butter was filled in the pots. Vyasa put one piece into each of the containers and the last piece was put in the hundred and first vessel to fulfill Gandhari’s desire for a daughter. The pots were to remain undisturbed for two years. Just as a chicken egg is put in an incubator to hatch, Vyasa did the same to bring to life the children of Gandhari. Duryodhana was the first to come out as a full-fledged baby. He was therefore the first son of Gandhari and the daughter Dusshala came from the hundred and first pot. Thus, Dhritharashtra had a hundred sons and a daughter by his wife Gandhari. Dhritharashtra wanted to know if his son Duryodhana would become a king as Yudhishthira the eldest had the right to the throne. Vidura said that Duryodhana had brayed like an ass on birth which was ominous and therefore he should be killed. But Dhritharashtra did not agree out of fatherly affection.
Pandu married Kunti and Madri but a curse deprived him from having children. Now, from where did the Pandava sons come?
 
Kunti as a young girl got a boon from sage Durvasa, for her devoted service to him. He taught her a mantra, which, when addressed to a particular deity, would bless her with a son. To test the mantra out of childish curiosity, she invoked the sun-god and he appeared instantaneously. The disastrous consequence sent her into a frightful fit. She pleaded the sun-god to pardon her innocent mistake committed in a playful mood. He said that the invoked mantra had to take effect and Kunti found herself bearing the child of the sun god. However, she managed to keep the conception of the child a secret, known only to a maid. With the term completed, she gave birth to a son. Afraid of the secret becoming known, she floated a basket in the river with the baby in it. This child grew up to be the valorous warrior, Karna, in a charioteer’s house. He was reputed for his philanthropy and even today he is quoted as a model of generosity. He was born with the protective kavacha and kundala [chest shield and ear-rings] imbedded in his body. As an ally of Duryodhana in the Kurukshetra battle, Karna had promised Kunti that he would attack only Arjuna, Indra wanted to guard his son against the invincible warrior. So, Indra asked for the natural shields and Karna gifted them to him without questioning. During the war also, lying wounded with his chariot wheel stuck, Karna, as his last act of charity, gave away all his merits of good actions to Krishna when he came begging as a brahmana.
 
He was always considered to be the son of a charioteer. Not being a prince, Arjuna refused to accept him as an eligible combatant in a contest to prove his dexterity in archery. Karna felt insulted. Duryodhana recognized the potential of a great warrior in Karna and was sure he would turn out to be very useful in his fight against the Pandavas. By making him the King of Anga, as if out of concern for Karna’s self respect, cunning Duryodhana offered the best bait within his power and had Karna’s support sealed in his favour. As an expression of gratitude, Karna joined the Kauravas in the great eighteen day Kurukshetra war between the cousins.
 
 When Kunti could not expect Pandu to give her a child, she invoked the mantra to Dharma and got Yudhishthira, Bhima was the son of Vayu and Arjuna had Indra as his father. Madri learnt the mantra from Kunti who asked her to make use of it only once. The clever woman resorted to the twins Ashvini Kumaras and bore the twins Nakula and Sahadeva at one stroke. It’s an ironic coincidence that the sons of Dhritharashtra and Pandu were not naturally born. Dhritharashtra and Pandu were brothers, descendents of Kuru dynasty yet their sons assumed the names Kauravas and Pandavas respectively as a mark of distinction when they became rivals in the Kurukshetra war.
 
Kripa and Kripi: Rishi Saradvan was once bathing in the river when an apsara tried to entice him. He ran away to save himself from her. On the way he dropped his child bearing energy in the forest from which twins were born, a male and a female.
 
King Santhanu saw these infants while hunting. He brought them home and named them Kripa and Kripi. Kripa was Kripacharya, who was the guru of the Kauravas and Pandavas before Dronacharya took over. Kripi was the wife of Dronacharya.
 
Draupadi: Drupada, the father of Draupadi, was the son of Prishata and their dynasty was known as Panchala. Drupada and Dronacharya, the preceptor of the Kauravas and Pandavas, were great friends in their youth. When Drupada became the king, he forgot his earlier promise to his friend to share the kingdom equally with him. Pandavas fought against Drupada because their help was demanded by Drona as guru dakshina. Drupada was defeated and Drona got his share of the kingdom. Drupada entertained a nemesis against Drona. He felt that mere man power was not productive. Divine grace was also necessary. He began a sacrifice to propitiate Shiva. When Shiva offered him a boon, he asked for a son who would kill Drona. There came a male and a female child from the sacrificial fire. They were named Drishtadyumna and Draupadi respectively.
 
 
Arjuna shoots an arrow on the fish
 
In a contest of archery, during the svayamvara of Draupadi, Arjuna outdid all contestants. His perfect aim at a revolving fish on top by looking at its reflection in a trough of water below enabled him to win her hand. But it was agreed upon that she will be the common wife of all five brothers, though they had other wives also. Since Draupadi was the wife of the Pandavas, her brother joined the Pandu sons in the battle. Therefore, Drishtadyumna got the opportunity to kill Drona. When he was deceitfully informed of the death of his son Ashvatthama, Drona broke down, throwing away the weapons in sorrow. Drishtadyumna killed Drona when he was unarmed, against the rules of warfare.
 

           Pandavas bring home Draupadi

 