Chapter 35: Conspiracy of Kamsa

 

Kamsa sent an asura named Arishta as a large humped bull. He was killed by Krishna using the horns of the bull as weapon. Asura Kesi also failed in his attempt against the divine boy. Vyoma was next in line to fall.
 
            Children are known to play the game of robbers and police. The cowherds also played a similar game. They had a few of their friends as lambs for the robbers to target. Vyoma, disguised as a robber, stole the cowboys acting as lambs, carried them to a dark mountain cave, pushed them inside and blocked the entrance with a huge rock. Krishna noticed the boys as lambs were missing and he at once saw the culprit behind the theft to be Vyoma. He seized the asura, the son of daitya Maya. Struggling to free himself from the strong hold, the demon assumed his real form resembling a mighty mountain. All his efforts failed against Krishna whose tight grip was like that of an iguana. The asura was squeezed and choked to death. Krishna ran to the cave, removed the rock and saved his friends from suffocation.
 
So far Kamsa was attacking Krishna only on a premise. His suspicion was confirmed by a surprise visit by Narada. He spilt the beans by revealing the true identity of Balarama and Krishna as the seventh and eighth sons of Devaki. He said, “Balarama is not the son of Rohini as is made to believe. He is the seventh son of Devaki. The daughter of Devaki was actually Yashoda’s child, a form of the Lord’s Yoga-maya. The infant was interchanged with Krishna, the eighth son of Devaki, to save him from your clutches.” With the entire secret known, Kamsa picked up his sword to kill the imprisoned Vasudeva and Devaki. Taking their life appeared to be the only immediate consolation to his frustration. Narada stopped him and advised him against further perpetration of evil and criminal acts.
 
With the numerous attempted failures to kill Krishna, Kamsa’s nervousness kept mounting by the day. Yet he was not prepared to accept defeat. He was confident of success through the master plan he had hatched to kill both Balarama and Krishna together. He called his councilors to tell them his elaborate strategy to kill two birds with one stone. He began, “I will not allow Krishna to execute me, as prophesied. I will see that I call my shots first. The two cowherds have to be killed in a wrestling bout, right here in Mathura. You have to station an elephant at the entrance arch and many decorative arches have to be erected in various places around the wrestling arena. Do not miss the proclamation, inviting people to witness the spectacular contest.”
 
            Organising the preparations, Kamsa began to scheme a fool proof plan to rope in his two enemies without arousing suspicion. He hit upon Akrura as the ideal messenger to carry his invitation to the people of Vraja. Akrura, a favourite of the Yadus, would not create doubt. They would not expect him to join hands with Kamsa against Krishna. Akrura was called to report immediately. Kamsa said, “Akrura, my trusted friend! You are my only well-wisher very close to my heart. I do not have to tell you that I expect you to follow my instructions strictly. Go to Gokula with my invitation to Krishna, Balarama, Nanda and all the Vrajas to participate in the sacrifice to Shiva. They can see for themselves the happy and prosperous Yadus in my kingdom. Also request them to bring the milk products like butter and curds in plenty for me. I have arranged a wrestling contest for the two boys with my strong wrestlers. On their arrival, Krishna and Balarama will be trampled upon by an elephant at the entrance gate of the wrestling arena. If by chance they escape there, my muscular wrestlers will complete the task for me. Then extinction of the Vrajas, Vasudeva, Devaki and even my father who is ambitious to ascend the throne again, would remove all the thorns from my life. I would have won over my death. Establishing my sovereignty would be a cake walk. I have opened my heart and placed my guarded secret before you. I hope I can rely on you for confidentiality and see that my scheme is not foiled.” Akrura agreed to act as ordered but he made very clear the great truth that ‘Man proposes and God disposes.’ He explained, “Despite all plans within the intellectual ability and physical capacity of man, results are sometimes adverse. Human failure in organising things has but little to do with the reversal. There is a powerful force beyond called destiny that supersedes. One should be mentally prepared to accept the vagaries of life which are directed by our luck.” With these wise words, Akrura mounted his chariot on his deputation to Gokula. 
   
            Happily going on his assignment, Akrura’s thoughts went out to Krishna and his prospects of meeting his dear friend. He, however, brushed aside the passing doubt about being misunderstood as the trusted representative of Kamsa. He was confident of a warm welcome from Krishna who understands the hearts and minds of everyone. Akrura prostrated before Krishna who expressed his immense happiness on meeting his kinsman after a long lapse of time. No need to mention the affectionate welcome with a tight bear hug. Krishna confided his pent up sorrow with his dear friend. He cursed himself for being at the root of all his parents’ miseries and the death of his siblings at the hands of his uncle Kamsa, an uncle only in name. The thought of his uncle depressed him because the prosperity of Kamsa was built on the foundation of evil bricks baked in his criminal mind. Akrura sympathized with him over his grief.
 
            Now it was for Akrura to deliver his message from Kamsa to Balarama and Krishna. He began with Narada’s disclosure of the identities of the two brothers to Kamsa, during his visit to Mathura. He also informed them about Narada’s advice to Kamsa to keep clear of evil actions when he was about to kill Vasudeva and Devaki. Having presented Kamsa’s invitation, Akrura told the extensive preparation being made in Mathura to kill Balarama and Krishna in a wrestling contest. The brothers reacted to the information with a mild smile and did not divulge it to anyone.
 

 Akrura's vision of vishnu under water
           
            The excited residents of Vraja got ready with the gifts requested by Kamsa. Nanda and the other people started on their journey in their chariots while Krishna and Balarama drove with Akrura in his chariot. On the way, Akrura took a dip in the river Kalindi. Inside the water, Akrura had the divine vision of Vishnu as the two brothers Balarama and Krishna. He could not believe his eyes. To make sure of what he saw, he tried to look out of water. He saw the two of them seated in the chariot awaiting his return. Krishna turned his head away pretending to be unaware of the under water vision of Akrura. Brooding over the unusual experience, Akrura was convinced that the vision had revealed the truth. The brothers were Lord Vishnu and Ananthshesha incarnate on earth. Akrura returned in high spirits and Krishna knew Akrura’s rapturous state was the consequence of what he had revealed to him under water.
 
            At the outskirts of the city, the brothers expressed their desire to stroll through the streets of Mathura. They got down and sent Akrura home. Reluctantly Akrua left them to themselves and retired home after reporting to Kamsa of their arrival. On the way, they accosted a washerman to give them the finest of clothes he had in the bundle. The washerman was infuriated. In derogatory words he said, though forest dwellers, they were being chivalrous to aspire for the monarch’s clothes. He tried to scare them with the threat of severe treatment from the security guards. Krishna gave him the suitable treatment by chopping off his head. Out of fear of the dangerous man, the rest of the washermen fled dropping their bundles. Krishna and Balarama put on the fine clothes and distributed the rest among the cowherds.
 
            The weaver was in direct contrast to the ruffian washerman. The courteous weaver was very pleased to have Krishna and Balarama at his loom. He gave them the best clothes and jewelry of precious gems. Adorned in those clothes with the garlands of the choicest flowers offered by the florist made them the cynosure of all eyes. The good deeds of everyone are at once recognised and rewarded by God, no matter how trivial they might be. So were the weaver and the florist.
 

 florist
           
            God takes care to remove the problems of people devoted to serve him. Trivakra, [meaning one with three deformities] a pretty young woman with a hunch back and other deformities was shown kindness by Krishna. Krishna saw her hastily going somewhere with an ointment in her hand. The afflictions of the beautiful woman sent a wave of compassion through his heart. On enquiry, she informed them that she has been that way from birth. The ointment she had in her hand was for the monarch, who enjoyed her massage daily and that she was hurrying for duty. Krishna and Balarama requested her to let them experience the pleasure of the soothing massage. She wholeheartedly agreed as she felt flattered to find two handsome young boys desiring her services. She quickly busied herself with the massage. Krishna was impressed by the readiness of the woman to oblige immediately. He thought she deserved a reward best suited for her. He decided that setting right her deformities would be the ideal redressal. He pressed her toes with his foot and raised her chin with his two fingers. Like magic, her deformities vanished within the wink of an eye. A pretty young woman stood before Krishna who was pleased to find herself as a normal human being. Never had she dreamt that such a miracle would happen in her life. Full of gratitude, she invited them to her house, where she wanted to honour them in her own small way. Krishna assured to visit her as soon as his contemplated mission was productively completed.
 
 
            Balarama and Krishna proceeded to attend the Shiva Dhanu sacrifice. Krishna went straight to the heavy bow on the platform and lifted it with his left hand. The bow snapped into two pieces when he tried to string it. The guards appointed for the security of the bow charged against him. On hearing about the bow broken by his enemy, the cowherd boy, Kamsa sent a number of armed army personnel to fight against him. All of Kamsa’s men were killed by Krishna and Balarama with just the two pieces of the bow. Their valour astonished the spectators who were admiring their handsome personality with unblinking eyes. The two majestically walked out of the sacrificial ground as if nothing had happened. They returned to the carts of the Vrajas for a peaceful night’s sleep. But for Kamsa it was a night of restlessness. He tossed in his bed, tensed by the breaking of the bow as an ill-omen. He tried his best to convince himself that it was nothing more than one of Krishna’s playful pranks. Seized by the fear of death, Kamsa was in a state of delirium. He visualized various portents of death between wakefulness and intermittent sleep.
 
            At day break, Kamsa woke up, dizzy with death psychosis. He ordered the commencement of the wrestling competition. He still held on to the last straw of hope to nullify the prophecy of his death. The spectators were tense in their seats, fearing the outcome of the contest, with the stalwarts of Kamsa challenging the boys who were not even in their youth. Kamsa was on the royal dais, surrounded by the subordinate kings. The tabors were sounded to announce the entrance of the wrestlers Chanura, Mushtika, Kula, Shala and Toshala. Krishna and Balarama walked towards the place of action. At the entrance they were attacked by an elephant named Kuvalayapida. Excited by the mahout, the elephant lifted Krishna with his trunk who slipped out of the grip like an eel. After wounding one of the animal’s feet, Krishna disappeared. The animal could, all the same, locate Krishna by his sense of smell. Again Krishna deluded him. To add to the elephant’s frustration, Krishna held the tail and dragged him a long distance in a serpentine way. By a mere kick, Krishna sent the animal rolling on the ground. The elephant regained stability and dug his tusks forcibly into the earth, thinking Krishna had followed him in the fall. Finally, Krishna grabbed his trunk, felled the elephant like a tree and the animal breathed his last when he stamped on it. Pulling out one tusk each, Krishna and Balarama walked into the arena. Victory over the powerful elephant by the mere strength of their arms, made Kamsa’s hair stand on ends. He wriggled in his seat and tried his best to conceal his discomfiture.
 
            Now, Kamsa was going to play his trump card in the day’s scheme of plan. Chanura placed himself in the centre of the arena and with arrogance invited Krishna and Balarama for a game of wrestling. He mockingly addressed the boys, “You cattle tenders are dexterous in wrestling because these are your pastime games while your cattle are grazing. Besides, you have just exhibited your prowess against the elephant having the strength of a thousand elephants. The king is eager to watch the exciting game for which you two have been specially invited. You, Krishna, can come to the centre to stand against me while Balarama can be Mushtika’s opponent.” Krishna replied, “We are the subjects of the Lord of Bhojas. We have been honoured by the monarch’s invitation. It is our duty to gratify the wishes of our Lord.”
 
            The contest started with each trying to outdo the other by varying the techniques. The people were sympathetic towards the young boys who were facing hard core professionals. To the surprise of the people, the twodaityas succumbed to the attack of the Vraja boys. Soon Kula, Shala and Toshala also fell lifeless, cheering everyone except Kamsa. In a fury, Kamsa with blood shot eyes shouted his throat hoarse ordering the death of king Nanda, Vasudeva and his father Ugrasena to show his hostility towards them. Krishna thought his patience had been put to ultimate test and he could not endure anymore. When Krishna fiercely jumped on to the dais, Kamsa thought death was approaching him. He lifted his sword and as he tried to get up to challenge Krishna, his crown fell off his head. As the saying goes, ‘coming events cast their shadows before’, the fall of the crown was a pointer to the downfall of Kamsa. Krishna held Kamsa by his hair, dragged him down to the centre of the wrestling ground. Climbing on to the fallen king, Krishna sounded Kamsa’s last post. What an irony of fate! When Kamsa had planned a spectacular show of Krishna’s death for his subjects in the arena, they were destined to witness the end of their king instead. It would astonish people that Kamsa, with a wretched disposition, reached the abode of Vishnu. The reason is that God is gracious even to the wicked, who constantly think of him, whatever be the manner. Kamsa was bitterly obsessed by the divine prophecy. He appeared to have been mesmerized by the thought of Lord Vishnu as the controller of his death.
 

 Kamsa killed
            Vexed with the death of Kamsa, his eight brothers assaulted Krishna and were killed. The widows, though grieving over the loss, were wise enough to realise that their husbands had received a fitting punishment for their evil deeds. They were aware that hostility with the Lord always led to a disastrous end.
            
            Balarama and Krishna comforted the bereaved families and went to release their parents from prison as it was their first and foremost duty. The parents visualized their sons as the Lord. Therefore instead of an embrace, they were saluted by their parents, when they touched their feet.
 

Krishna's parents out of prison