The revered rishi Kardama, in the satya yuga, was engaged in difficult austerities on the banks of river Sarasvati for ten thousand years. His intense meditation pleased Lord Hari, and he made his appearance, seated on his vehicle Garuda, in great splendour. Goddess Sri was seated on his bosom and he was wearing the gem Kaustubha. Kardama thought himself to be among the chosen few to be favoured thus by the Lord. When asked to make a request, he told the Lord, “I wish nothing from you except a wife who would be a devoted partner in the discharge of my religious duties. I find this necessary because I cannot perform religious rites to the deities, rishis and my manes without a wife.” The Lord said, “I am aware that you are free from lust. Your meditation is directed only to me and the efforts of devoted people never go futile. The wealthy prosperous Manu, the lord of the prajapatis, will visit you soon with his wife Shatarupa. Of his daughters, one named Devahuti, endowed with beauty and character is worthy to be your wife. She too wishes to have a husband of your stature. She will help you fulfill the commands of Brahma to procreate for which you are going through the grinding penances all these years. This fair daughter of Manu will bring forth nine daughters who in turn will beget many children by their marriage to sages. I expect you to dedicate the fruits of your actions to me. As a householder, kindness and concern for universal welfare should be your guiding principles in life. When you have discharged your duties, renounce the world and take to sanyasa. You will then realize that I am the primeval base on which you and everything in this universe subsist. Your wife will beget a son by my divine energy who will be the founder of the Tattva Samhita.” The Lord disappeared after revealing the future. He strictly instructed the sage to adhere to his directions regarding the proper discharge of duties.
 
           Soon Manu and his wife arrived at the rishi’s hermitage as expected. Manu was enchanted by the beautiful surroundings, which had trees with bushy foliage housing various species of birds and animals strolled around freely. Lord’s appearance at the hermitage to bless the sage had enhanced its sanctity. The royal couple entered the thatched cottage of the sage who welcomed them with due respect. The king broached the subject of marriage to the muni and said he would be greatly honoured if he accepted his daughter’s hand in marriage. He introduced his daughter Devahuti as the sister of his two sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Ever since she heard about Kardama’s spiritual accomplishments, she had decided on him as her husband. Kardama accepted her with pleasure. After celebrating the marriage of their daughter, the king and the queen took leave with a heavy heart as they had to return to their kingdom.
 
            Devahuti served her husband with devotion in all the religious duties he performed. Thus many years went by happily without any complaint from Devahuti for the austere life she had been following. Kardama was pleased with his wife’s attitude and he felt duty bound to reward her with a boon. He offered to grant her divyadrishti, spiritual insight by his yogic powers which would enable her to enjoy the divine pleasures. Instantly she was relieved of her responsibilities. She however bashfully expressed her desire to have children. Kardama immediately employed his yogic powers to bring a celestial car descending to the earth endowed with all imaginable comforts and pleasures. He asked her to have an ablution in the water of the river Sarasvati flowing nearby. As soon as she got into the water, she saw many damsels ready with beautiful clothes, ornaments, flowers and perfumes. All decked, she emerged from the water to present herself before her waiting husband. They led a happy married life in that divine luxury for many years.
 
The yogic powers helped Kardama to divide himself in nine different ways which resulted in the birth of nine daughters to Devahuti. Now he directed his mind to understand the identity of the Lord that revealed the futility of worldly objects. Detachment prepared him for renunciation, to live the life of a mendicant. Observing the changed attitude of her husband, Devahuti was crest fallen. She told her husband woefully, “Married to an intellectual like you, I failed to recognize the value of life. I wasted it in material happiness and did not ever think of meditating on the Supreme Lord. When you are on the verge of leaving, light has dawned on me. Without you how am I going to find worthy husbands for our daughters? Who will teach me the philosophy of life?” The maharshi replied, “Do not panic unnecessarily. Nothing is lost. Withdraw yourself to the meditation of God. Unperturbed, you concentrate on the Lord responsible for creation, preservation and destruction. You will realize he is Lord Vishnu rolled into one. Pleased with you, a part of his energy will enter your womb and be born as your son.” Devahuti obediently observed her husband’s advice and was with a child with the Lord’s grace, who was to be her son.
 

Devahuti advised by Kardama
 
            Meanwhile, Brahma was pleased with Kardama’s obedience to his advice. He asked him to perform the marriage of his daughters to eminent sages like Marichi and the like. That would help him [Brahma] multifariously in his effort to propagate. Brahma told Devahuti that her son would command great respect among siddhas and saints for his Sankhya School of Philosophy. He will be known as ‘Kapila’. His wide spread fame would be a matter of honour for his parents. Kardama performed the marriage of his daughters. The prospect of having the Lord as his son aroused an exhilarating feeling. He thanked God for his special mercy. Renunciation followed by meditation secured him the feet of Lord Vishnu.
 
            Soon Kapila was born and he lived with his mother to keep her happy. He preferred to keep himself in isolation as he believed in the tattva marga. One day, his mother recollected the words of Brahma about her son. She approached Kapila and said, “Oh revered one! You are the Lord incarnate. Show me the path of light that will remove the darkness of ignorance pervading in me. By your grace, I want relief from the bondage of birth and death. You have been born to deliver people from getting drowned in a life of material infatuation. You are the foremost to know the moral values of life. Kindly lead me to emancipation through enlightenment.” Impressed by his mother’s genuine curiosity towards knowing the Ultimate Truth, he became her preceptor. First he explained to her that except Vishnu everything is maya, illusory appearances, pitfalls from which one has to be guarded. Universal love would extricate a man, who wishes supreme bliss, from evil thoughts and actions. Sincere devotion would earn him the love of God, affording communion with the Almighty. Kapila helped his mother to comprehend the Divine, the goal to be aspired in life by one and all. After completing the spiritual instruction, he took his mother’s permission to leave for an austere life in the north. He dedicated his entire life time for the upliftment of all. To this day his Sankhya Philosophy is firmly established on earth drawing many followers.
 

 Kapila his mother's preceptor
           
            Devahuti too left the hermitage without any regret except that she felt sorry for the separation from her son. She contemplated on her son, the incarnation of Vishnu. Meditation became her way of life.
 

Interesting Anecdotes

 

Putrika vow: This vow is taken by a man without a son during the wedding of his daughter. A son born to her would become his adopted son according to the agreement. Manu had three daughters Akuti, Devahuti and Prasuti. He also had two sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Yet he entered into the above agreement during the marriage of his daughter Akuti with prajapati Ruchi. Ruchi, having the splendour of Brahma, had a son and a daughter. The son named Yajyna, was the incarnation of the sacrificial form of Vishnu. The daughter was Dakshina, an incarnation of Vishnu’s consort Lakshmi, for the goddess manifests herself as the fees given to the priests during sacrifices. Manu delighted by the boy’s glory, adopted him as his son. Dakshina continued to live with her parents. A very peculiar incident happened when these two children grew up to marriageable age. Dakshina expressed her desire to marry Yajyna. The alliance was permitted by the Putrika vow. Further, the boy was the form of Vishnu, and the girl, the form of Lakshmi, both inseparable divine couple. To their delight, the marriage was performed and they had twelve sons.
 
            Heavenly Ganges: Devakulya, the grand-daughter of Kardama, became the heavenly river Ganges in her next birth. She assumed the form of the water she had used for washing Sri Hari’s feet.
 
            The sons of Atri: Anasuya, daughter of Kardama, married rishi Atri. Their three sons, Soma, Lord Dattatreya and Sage Durvasa were the incarnation of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva respectively. The unusual occurrence of the trinity being born to the same parents has an interesting story. Atri was ordered by Brahma to engage himself in the propagation of creation. The rishi with his wife went to mountain Riksha to perform severe penance. For one hundred years he stood on one foot, subsisted on air, defied cold as well as heat and controlled his mind through pranayama. His only thought was to be blessed with offspring by the propitiation of the Supreme Being. Besides being pleased with his efforts, the three Gods were concerned about the danger of the fire shooting out of his head as a result of his rigorous practice of pranayama. They appeared before him to convey their satisfaction. They gave their word to him to be born as his three sons. The sage prostrated before the Gods for their blessings. He looked a little puzzled at having won over the three Gods when he had meditated only on the Supreme Lord. They explained, “The three of us together constitute the Ultimate Truth. In appreciation of your steadfast resolve, we wish to reward you by being born as your sons. Endowed with our energy, may their erudition be celebrated in the world and bring fame to you!”
   
Shukracharya and Markandeya: Khyati was Kardama’s daughter married to sage Bhrigu. They had a daughter named Kavi. The revered Ushana, popularly known as Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons, was her son. Kavi had a brother Datta. His grandson was Markandeya by his son Mrukanda and great grandson of Bhrigu. Markandeya had the good fortune of never aging. He was born by the blessings of Shiva.
Mrukanda and Marudvati were without a child for a long time. Severe austerities performed to propitiate Shiva, presented the lord before them. He wanted to know if they would like to have a son with intelligence and short life or an unintelligent boy with longevity. They opted for the first offer. Markandeya was hence born with a life span of only sixteen years. He was an ardent devotee of Shiva and became well versed in all subjects. He had mastered the mahamrutyunjaya mantra. On the day of his death, when Yama came to claim his life, he found him praying in the temple before the Shiva Linga.The boy was frightened at the sight of Yama and clung to the linga for protection. Yama threw his noose at the boy which encircled the linga along with him. Enraged at the audacity of Yama, Shiva emerged and struck down with his trident the Kala, as he is called, for Yama decides on the time of death of everyone. Thus Shiva gets the name 'Kalaharana.' Shiva blessed Marakandeya with eternal life and also proclaimed that he would ever be sixteen years of age. Devas pleaded Shiva to revive Yama to save the earth from being overburdened with no one to keep control over the birth and death in the right proportion as a check on the growth of population.
There is a story connecting Markandeya with Vishnu. Once the earth was about to be engulfed by water when Parvati closed Shiva's eyes in a playful mood and there was darkness all round signifying the oncoming of the doom's day. There was only a single trunk of a barren mango tree standing amidst the surging water. Markandeya climbed the tree and prayed to Shiva to rescue the earth from the impending calamity. That is why Shiva is also called 'Ekamreshvara'. Hearing the distress call, Vishnu appeared as a child on a banyan leaf and asked the boy to enter his mouth to save himself from the rising water. Inside, Markandeya saw the entire universe, with the seven regions, the seven oceans, mountains and kingdoms inclusive of living beings. Confused at the extraordinary vision, he started praying to Vishnu to draw him out of the baffled state of mind. Vishnu appeared and declared himself as time and death. Markandeya then lived with Vishnu as his devotee for thousands of years.
 
            Nara and Narayana: Daksha, the self born son of Brahma, married Prasuti, the third daughter of Manu. They had sixteen daughters. Thirteen of them were married to Dharma, one to Agni, another to the Pithrus and the last, Sati, to Bhava [Shiva]. Virtuous Murti, married to Dharma, gave birth to two ascetic sons Nara and Narayana. Celestial music, playing of instruments, beating of the drums, dancing and rejoicing marked their birth. The two ascetics, the incarnation of Hari, were extolled and honoured even by gods. Having blessed all the people, these two went away to mountain Gandhamada. They descended again on earth during the Mahabharatha age as the two Krishnas, meaning having dark complexion, one was Lord Krishna and the other Arjuna. Sri Krishna the Narayana, the head of the Yadu race, was born to releive the earth from the burden of wicked people. Arjuna, the Nara was the valiant warrior of the Kuru dynasty and the companion of Krishna. Arjuna, one of the sons of Pandu, was later referred as Pandava along with his other brothers. His cousins, the sons of Dhritharashtra, acquired the name Kaurava. In fact both of them were the descendents of king Kuru.
  
 Rantideva: King Rantideva was the son of Nara of the Bharadvaja family. His glories were sung world over. In order to satisfy the needs of others, he quite often went on starvation and thirst. Once, he and his relatives went without food and water for forty eight days and they were near collapse. On the forty ninth day, lot of food poured into the hands of Rantideva. He distributed the food to all his relatives and had just enough for himself. To test his patience, generosity and will power, God came in various forms as a brahmana, a menial, a pack of mongrels and finally as a chandala begging for food and water. The kind king parted with all the food and also water to the last drop unmindful of his critical need. Lord Vishnu presented himself in his real form before Rantideva. Beholding the Lord, his mortal needs vanished and all that he was conscious of was worship of Lord Narayana. He and those closely associated with him became saints devoted to Lord Narayana.
 