Shukracharya was the spiritual preceptor of the asuras. He had given them invincible weapons which were used against the devas. The devas were not adequately equipped to manage the terrible onslaught of the asuras. Durvasa’s curse had divested Indra of his power. The devas were gradually getting depleted in number. The deities approached Brahma for help. He presented the case of the suras to Vishnu.
 
            Lord Vishnu readily offered to help with a warning about the rigid discipline the gods were to observe. He said, “Make a careful note of my instructions. Let there not be the slightest digression. You know that the asuras have the able guidance of Shukracharya. He will catch you red handed if you try any mischief. He will at once turn the asuras against you successfully, foiling all your chances of recovery. Deal with them with utmost caution. Pretend to make peace with your adversaries. Attitude of conflict will be detrimental to achieving our objective. Enacting a farce friendship, get them to work with you for obtaining nectar which bestows immortality even on mortals. Finally you will be the sole beneficiaries. Keep this as a guarded secret. Get yourself busy soon. Throw the herbs and plants into the milky ocean. Use the mountain Mandara as the churning rod while Vasuki, the king of the nagas, will serve as the rope to rotate the Mandara. Note that humility would be the stepping stone to your victory. Politely accede to the dictates of the asuras without any friction. No need to be alarmed when poison emerges as one of the products of churning. Do not exhibit any resentment if you have to sacrifice your wishes for the success of your plans. I am well aware that it’s going to be a frustrating trial on your emotions but you have to keep cool.”
 
            Expressing their gratitude to the Lord, they went to Bali, the king of the asuras for a truce. Bali was gratified with the change in the attitude of the devas. He ordered his army to stop aggression. The army chiefs found their hands tied against the unarmed enemies whom they could vanquish effortlessly. Complying with the plan of the deities for a joint churning of the ocean for nectar, Bali made sure of an equal share for the asuras.
 
 
Churning of the ocean depicted at the Svarnabhumi Airport, Thailand
           
            With great enthusiasm, the asuras and the devas uprooted the Mandara. They needed the assistance of Sri Hari to transport it on his Garuda to the ocean as it was a task beyond the combined strength of the two parties. Vasuki was promised his share of the nectar if he agreed to be the rope for churning. All was set for the commencement of the great task, with Vasuki wound round the mountain. The asuras wanted to be at the snake’s head for auspicious reasons. Sri Hari was holding the head of the snake. He smilingly acceded to Bali’s request. The deities held the tail and vigorous churning got started. The heavy weight of the mountain was drawing it repeatedly into the water. Sri Hari in the form of a tortoise held the mountain on his back to stop it from sinking. With a proper anchor provided, the churning continued without hindrance, the energy for the strenuous act being pumped into the two sides by Vishnu. The aquatic creatures were highly agitated by the velocity of the churning. The fire and heat emitted by Vasuki was draining the asuras which was evident from the slackened speed. The deities were also exhausted but were revived by a cool downpour. As things were progressing thus, the foaming poison called halahala emerged out. It posed a serious problem to the lives of the creatures under water. The patriarch of the creatures pleaded help from Shambhu [Shiva] who took it up as his duty to save the situation. Lord Shiva held the poison in the hollow of his palm and drank it. He arrested the poison in his throat which tainted it blue. Hence he gets his epithet ‘neelakantha’ His consort Bhavani was delighted at the life saving act of her husband and so were the creatures. A few drops of poison spilled from his palm which was consumed by some aquatic creatures, scorpions, snakes and herbal plants. This gave them the permanent intrinsic poisonous character.
 
           Churning continued further which brought forth the sacred cow Surabhi whose milk and milk products, like butter and curd were used for the sacrificial oblations. Ucchaishravas, the best of horses, went to Bali who expressed a desire to own it. Sri Hari advised Indra not to compete with Bali for the possession of the horse. Iravatha, the king of elephants, became Indra’s vehicle. Parijata, the most beautiful flower went to the celestial region. Like the flash of light, Goddess Lakshmi emerged from the ocean spreading her radiance in all quarters. The devas and the danavas were spell bound by the beauty of the divine lady. Each one was vying to win her favour by offering her the best gift possible. They had an eye on the good fortune she would bring along if she was pleased with any one of them. Lakshmi strolled around like a moving golden creeper with a lotus garland in hand. She was assessing them, but was not impressed by any of them. Each seemed to have some glaring flaw displeasing to her. The first site of Sri Hari coveted her heart. She recognized the lust free character of the Lord, the refuge of everyone. What she liked most was, he was not in the rat race with others to possess her. She saw in him a person suitable to be her husband. She bashfully garlanded him, indicating her choice of husband. Sri Hari also accepted her with pleasure by offering the left side of his chest as her abode close to his heart.
 
            So far innumerable things appeared from the churning but the important of all, for which the entire process was started, still eluded them. They decided to continue till they achieved the object of desire. Ultimately, an effulgent well adorned male, surfaced with a pot of nectar. On seeing the pot of nectar, the asuras threw to the wind their agreement of sharing it with the devas. They snatched the pot from Dhanvantari, the person who came out from the ocean. Dhanvantari is the propagator of medicine and the father of the science of Ayurveda. Having proved their deceitful nature, the asuras were excited about having the entire nectar to themselves. Depressed devas reported to Sri Hari about losing the nectar to the cunning asuras. The Lord consoled them and promised to make the danavas have a taste of their own bitter pill by his illusory powers.
 
            Infighting among the asuras began as to who should have the first taste of the nectar. Petty bickering grew into a terrible conflict of enmity. Finding the moment congenial, Sri Hari made his appearance as a beautiful young woman with seductive looks. The asuras momentarily ceased to fight, being captivated by the beauty of the lady. Fancying her to have been sent by the Almighty for their good, the asuras agreed to solve their problem by requesting her to be their mediator. They made the request by handing over the pot to her. She took a verbal undertaking from the asuras that they would accept her decision, agreeable or not, as final. Both the parties were made to wait in a room till the lady walked in with the pot. The repulsive unfair behaviour of the asuras forced Sri Hari to decide against awarding any nectar to the danavas, more so because the asuras were his arch enemies. The lady allotted places in rows for the asuras and the deities. Beguiling the asuras with loving words, she started the distribution with the celestials. The daityas did not dare express their dissension against the decision of giving priority to the deities. One reason was, they did not want to be blamed for breach of contract, which they feared might result in losing their entire share of the nectar. Secondly, impropriety to argue with a woman deterred them from even opening their mouths. Amidst the trickery of the Lord, Rahu, one of the asuras, acted smartly to outwit even the Almighty. Assuming the form of a celestial, Rahu seated himself between the sun and the moon. They could see through his disguise and instantly exposed him. Rahu had just then poured the nectar into his mouth. The Lord severed Rahu’s head, not allowing the nectar to go down the throat. Otherwise, Rahu would have become immortal. However the nectar in his mouth made his head indestructible. So, Shiva agreed to give his head a position among the planets. (Ketu, his pair planet, is believed to represent his body. Thus they formed the navagraha along with the seven Lords of the week namely, Surya, Soma, Mangala, Budha, Guru, Shukra and Shani ) It is believed that Rahu has his revenge on the sun and the moon on the two dark days in a month. The new moon day is when there is no moon indicating that the sun loses its power by which the moon gets light. On the full moon day though its orb is complete, it is the last day of the waxing fortnight. It’s a sign of the moon being at the end of its  glory with its waning to begin the next day. So the full moon day is the dark day for the moon. There is a mythical story that the solar eclipse and the lunar eclipse are caused because Rahu eats up the sun and the moon on these occasions to allay his wrath. When the entire nectar had been distributed among the deities, the Lord discarded his assumed form of a lady.
 
            This story has an advice for the intelligent planning of our lives also. Life presents various opportunities and it is for us to properly utilize them to our benefit. The situation was equally conducive to the asuras and the devas to have the nectar to attain immortality. But the asuras lost the privilege because they were opposed to the Lord by their deceit while the celestials sought his unfailing help. Just as a diamond cuts another diamond, the Lord punished the asuras by a similar foul game. Thus, success is assured if we follow the righteous path while our life will be a failure if we are evil minded.
 
            Now what do you think about the reaction of the asuras on being cheated of the nectar? They could not be expected to meekly take the defeat. They waited for Sri Hari to depart from the site. They launched a terrible attack on the deities. Each one chose a suitable rival partner. Bali stood up against Indra but succumbed to the severe blow from his vajrayudha, the thunder bolt. Though the asuras had a lot of casualities, they relentlessly fought with the deities. Using the magical powers, the asuras proliferated so much that they outnumbered the devas and drained their strength. The Great Purusha, the Lord, revived them by instilling fresh power and the suras resumed with renewed vigour. Indra faced a set back when his thunder bolt was ineffective on Namuchi who took the place of Bali after he was killed. The demoralized Indra drew Brahma’s notice who revealed to him the secret of the impenetrable shield of Namuchi. In the past, Namuchi had obtained a boon from Brahma that he would be beyond the power of a weapon dry or wet. Indra had to think of a means to defeat the effect of the boon. It occurred to him that foam would be the solution as it is a combination of water and air [wet and dry]. It bore the desired result and Namuchi fell dead on the ground.  
 
            Brahma saw the deities heading to annihilate the danavas. He sent the divine sage Narada to bring about some sobriety in the deities.  He told them that their prosperity and immortality through nectar could not have happened without the help of the asuras, an idea suggested by Lord Narayana. It is not proper to indulge in a heinous act of destroying the danavas. He advised them to desist from the unworthy battle. With due respects to the sage, they ceased fighting and repaired to their region. Bali was carried to Shukracharya by the asuras. By the power of the sanjivini mantra, Bali and most of the dead asuras were revived by Shukracharya. Bali back to life did not experience any remorse over his defeat. His spiritual maturity showed him that one endowed with the power of discrimination between transient worldly happiness and the ever lasting bliss of the benevolence of God will never be affected by victory or defeat, good or bad, prosperity or diversity, happiness or sorrow. He had given a sermon to Indra about the philosophy of life in the course of the battle. His magnanimous attitude to life seems so unlike that of a daitya.
 

Interesting Anecdotes

 

Thunderbolt of Indra: The story goes that rishi Vishvarupa was very fond of his mother. She was from the family of asuras. Prompted by the affection, he used to give a portion of the sacrificial oblations secretly to the asuras. Indra detected the treachery of the rishi and cut off the three heads of Vishvarupa. The head that drank the soma juice became the chataka bird [the bird that looks up to the sky for the rain water to quench its thirst]. The second head that enjoyed wines took the form of a sparrow. The third that ate rice retained its original form. Tashtra, Vishvarupa’s father performed a yajna to raise an enemy against Indra. Due to mispronounciation of the word Indrashatru, the meaning changed. Much against Tashtra's wish, an asura came out of the sacrificial fire, who finally turned out to be Indra's victim.The asura was called Vritrasura, due to his terribly fierce personality. He had the capacity to swallow the deadliest of weapons of the gods. The asura initially exhibited strength that overpowered even the combined strength of the gods.
 

 Vritrasura comes out of the sacrificial fire
 
The defenseless gods went to the Lord for help. Pleased with their propitiation, the God directed Indra to go with the other deities to muni Dadhyancha who would readily offer his body to assist them against Vritrasura. He said that he would be of additional help to Indra, who had already secured the Narayana kavacha from Vishvarupa after his death. The invincible shield was given to Tashtra by Dadhyancha. Tashtra had passed on the charm to his son Vishvarupa. When requested, the muni gladly gifted his body to the gods. Indra’s vajrayudha, the thunder bolt was made from the bones of the muni, infused with the powers of the Revered One. In the direct encounter with Vritrasura, Indra found him to be a very difficult person to win over. When Indra chopped off both his arms, he used his jaws to pick up Indra and swallowed him. Protected by the Narayana kavacha, Indra tore open his abdomen and came out alive. Yet the demon seemed to remain alive even after Indra came out of his abdomen. Attempts by Indra to smash his head with his thunder bolt were not successful as it was effectively opposed every time. After prolonged fight, the asura was finally eliminated. With the death of the demon, Tashtra's sacrifice proved futile and he could not take revenge on Indra for killing his son.
 

 Asura chasing Indra
 
Now when Indra was free to ponder over his past actions, he was shaken by the fear of incurring sin, because Vishvarupa, a brahmana had been killed by him. He hid himself in the manasarovar in north-east. Agni, the tongue of gods who carries food for the celestials, had no access into the water to supply food to Indra. He remained starving for a thousand years to absolve his sins. In the mean time, Nahusha held the reins of heaven as its ruler. His arrogant style of reign as well as his attempts to misbehave with Indra's wife Sachi, brought her to curse him to become a serpent. Indra returned with a light heart devoid of any guilt and assumed his position as the king.
Betel leaves and Chaurasia: Mohini completing the distribution of nectar,left the empty vessel near Indra's elephant Iravata. Soon the gods noticed a strange creeper growing out of the urn and became ecstatic about the unexpected appearance of the plant. Vishnu ordered Dhanvantari to examine the new growth. The god well informed with the science of medicine discovered the stimulating quality of the leaves. From then, Vishnu began to offer the leaves as a gesture of love and affection. The lords forming the trinity came to be associated with the betel trine-Brahma was the betelnut, Vishnu the betel leaf (tamboola) and Shiva the lime applied to it.
 
There is a story as to how the betel leaf came to earth. The Pandavas, after the victory in Hastinapur, experienced the fervent desire for tamboola. They immediately sent a messenger to the Queen of snakes under ground with a request. The queen mightily pleased, obliged to cut the extreme phalange of her little finger. She sent it to the Pandavas, who planted the finger bit with great ceremony. Soon the betel creeper was cited. Since then, the creeper is also referred to as Nagaveli-the snake plant.
 
[Phalange means the three joints of bones on each of our fingers represented by the lines on the inner side of the palm. Extreme phalange is the tip of the finger up to the first joint.]
 
There is a brahmana community called the Chaurasias, in the North of India [present day Bihar]. Its interesting to know how they got that name. Devas once went to Naimisharanya on earth to perform an important auspicios sacrifice. On their way back to heaven, oppressed by the heat on earth, they were thirsty. A particular community offered betel leaves to the gods to quench their thirst. The juice of the leaves was very soothing to their parched mouth. Impressed by the hospitality, the gods blessed the people with the title 'Chaturasheetah', which was later shortened to Chaurasia in Hindi. This brahmana community of people are believed to be descendants of Kashyapa and Bharadvaja gotra [clan].
 
[In sanskrit chaturasheetihi stands for the number eighty four. Vedas accept the species of gods to be eightfour thousand.The gods therefore called the community by the number of their species.]
 

Pan shop
 
 Even today we can see people of the chaurasia community well established in the betel selling business and  have a clientele that enjoys chewing betel leaves with relish. The picture above is a betel kiosk, a pan shop.
 
            Lakshmi from the ocean: Various business propositions are often adopted by people as a profession. Since business can tilt either way in profit or loss, one has to be prepared for the risk involved. Selling milk is a safe business as there can be no loss even if there is slump in the market. Milk and milk products form an important part among our daily food requirements, and the demand is always high. So our ancient people associated milk with Lakshmi, a symbol of money. Since Lakshmi is believed to have originated from the ocean, the ocean is always referred to as milky ocean ??????????.

How did Lakshmi have her birth from the ocean when Vishnu already had her as his consort ? Once, sage Durvasa had a garland of beautiful flowers with bees hovering over them for honey. He had received it from an apsaras who had offered it to Goddess Lakshmi. Durvasa was roaming in the heaven when he saw Indra on his elephant Iravata. The sage threw the garland to Indra. In his pride of sovereignty, Indra disregarded the garland, not knowing that it was a gift to him from Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity. In effect, he threw away the prosperity laden with the blessings of the Goddess, which ought to have been accepted with reverence. Instead, he arrogantly placed it on the elephant’s head. Iravata agitated by the bees in the flowers, pulled it down and trampled on it.  There is another version of the story. Once when Indra was going in a grand procession followed by a host of deities, Durvasa threw the garland he had offered to Parvati. Due to the overflowing crowd, Indra could not take the flowers and it fell on Iravata's head. The agitated elephant shook his head and the garland fell down. Unknowingly Iravata trampled on it. Whatever be the story, the quick tempered sage cursed Indra for his rude behaviour. The curse was that Indra would have to surrender in defeat, his lordship of the three worlds to the asuras. Accordingly, Indra was stripped of his supremacy in the war with the asuras.
 
Indra, immensely depressed, went to Vishnu. In order to boost his morale and the confidence of the gods, he showed his bare chest to tell them, he too had lost his Lakshmi. In reality he had veiled the Goddess from their view by his illusory power of maya. He said that Lakshmi would emerge from the ocean when churned for nectar. Lakshmi garlanding Sri Hari as soon as she emerged from the ocean was all premeditated by the Lord to keep up his make believe story to Indra and the gods. This incident does not appear to be a mere narration of the usual fight of the asuras and the suras. It carries a deeper implication. When Vishnu showed his bare bosom, he wanted to convey that the defeat of the devas was his defeat too, the asuras always being inimical towards him. The Lord is ever on the side of righteousness. Lakshmi coming out of the ocean was indicative of the fact that prosperity and power would be restored to the gods and Indra when nectar is churned out. With evil intentions to deny the ambrosia to the devas, the asuras would be defeated in securing even their share of the sweet wine of immortality, assured the Lord. When that happened, Vishnu too would get back his Lakshmi. This boils down to the universal truth that joy of victory of evil is fleeting while honesty and piety are the everlasting victors.'??????? ???? ??????? SATYAMEVA JAYATE NANRUTAM]”.