Chapter 44: Jarasandha

           One day, Krishna was presiding over the assembly in the Sudarman hall. At that time, a royal emissary arrived to inform Krishna about the inhuman treatment the subordinate kings had to suffer in Jarasandha’s kingdom. Twenty thousand kings, who refused to yield to Jarasandha’s unreasonable demands, had been imprisoned. On behalf of all the suffering kings, he had come to place their submission at the feet of the Lord. They had complete faith in the Lord and were confident of their deliverance.
 
            Just then, Narada arrived with news from the Pandavas settled in Indraprastha. This was a barren uninhabitable land given by the Kauravas to their cousins under the impression that it would be of no use to them. The able management of Yudhishthira transformed the region into a fertile prosperous place with the assistance of the brothers. Indraprastha is the present day Delhi.
 

Pandava assembly in Indraprastha
           
            Narada came with a request from Yudhishthira, inviting Krishna to the Rajasuya sacrifice, he intended to perform. Yudhishthira said by gracing the occasion, he would have the blessings of the Lord in full measure. Krishna consulted his intellectual confidante Uddhava for advice. Uddhava said, “You have to attend to two important matters just now. It is your duty to honour your cousin’s request. At the same time, the suffering kings at Jarasandha’s mercy have to be rescued. For the Rajasuya sacrifice to be successfully completed, Yudhishthira would have to establish his sovereignty. To accomplish that, the kings ruling the ten quarters would have to become his vassals and so Jarasandha would have to be subjugated. I feel it would be proper if you went to Indraprastha for the Rajasuya sacrifice. You would then be achieving both ends. To match the enormous strength of Jarasandha, Bhima would be the right choice to meet him directly in a duel.” Accepting the wise advice, Krishna, with the permission of the elders, prepared to leave for Indraprastha with his wives and sons. Satisfied with Krishna’s plan, Narada went his way singing and meditating on the Lord.
 
            Krishna ascended his Garuda while the others reached by road. Krishna was greeted with smiles by the people of Indraprastha. The large family of Krishna was comfortably accommodated with due respect.
 
            Yudhishthira formally sought the blessings of Mukunda [Krishna] to commence the Rajasuya, the best of all sacrifices. Krishna wholeheartedly blessed Yudhishthira for success as he had won over the Lord by his subdued passions, the first enemy of man. Krishna pointed out the initial step before the commencement of the sacrifice. It was to bring the kings of the ten quarters under him. He also assured Yudhishthira that he could rely on his brothers by entrusting them with the responsibility. They would surely make their elder brother proud. The sons of Pandu returned victorious with their flags flying high but unfortunately, by oversight, Jarasandha was left out and this lapse caused anxiety to Yudhshthira. Krishna pacified him by putting forth Uddhava’s plan to tackle Jarasandha.
 
            It is necessary to know the secret of Jarasandha’s birth to understand the strategy adopted to kill him. Jarasandha was the grandson of Uparichara Vasu of Ajamihira dynasty and the son of Brihadratha. Brihadratha had two wives. The first wife gave birth to four sons. But the unlucky second wife had a son in halves divided vertically across. Convinced that the mutilated child would cause endless sorrow and pain, she threw him away. A rakshasi named Jara picked up the two pieces and accidentally brought them together. To her surprise she had, in her hands, a live full fledged boy whom she brought up to be a strong man. Thus the name Jarasandha, meaning joined by Jara.
 
Despite the notorious cruelty of Jarasandha, he was very solicitous to brahmanas by his charitable disposition towards them. This prompted Krishna to go in the guise of a brahmana, to hook him into a commitment. Krishna, Arjuna and Bhima entered Girivraja, the kingdom of Jarasandha. In disguise, they presented themselves before the king. Krishna praised his generosity, pious nature and compared him to the great souls Harishchandra and Shibi who sacrificed their mortal body for a noble benevolent cause.
 
Shrewd Jarasandha could see through the disguise. From the marks of a warrior on their body, he could recognise them as kshatriyas but the emblem of a brahmana compelled him to grant their request even if it be his head. Recollecting the life of the daitya king Bali, highly praised even to this day for gifting himself to the Vamana, Jarasandha offered to grant any boon.
 
Having committed the king to a promise, Krishna revealed their identity and said they had come to have a straight one to one fight with him. The choice of the opponent was his, offered Krishna. Jarasandha was furious over the deceit but did not lose heart. Confident about himself, he sarcastically remarked, “I shall keep my word to you. I will not fight against you, a mere cowherd. You have not been fair in your dealings with me. Afraid of me, you hid under the ocean. Arjuna is not my equal, either in age or prowess. So he is ruled out. Bhima seems to be the right match for me to challenge in the duel.”
 
           The fierce mace fight between two equals went on which shook all the quarters and it appeared they would bring the heavens down. Both having proved their strength, Krishna began to think of a winning strategy. It occurred to him that the death of Jarasandha could be achieved only by undoing the secret of his existence which was made possible by rakshasi Jara. Krishna picked up a twig and broke it vertically across demonstrating the method of killing him. Bhima intelligently got the clue and holding by his legs threw Jarasandha on the ground. Bhima pressed firm one leg of the enemy by his own and ripped the other vertically through by pulling it with his hands. Jarasandha kept coming up alive as the two pieces would join into a whole, the way Jara had joined them. Puzzled Bhima paused for a moment to understand the hint given by Krishna. Grasping the full meaning, Bhima became wise. Bhima placed one piece in an inverted direction so that realignment was not possible and thus Jarasandha met his end. Krishna installed Sahadeva, the son of Jarasandha, on the throne of Magadha and released the imprisoned kings. The death of Jarasandha did not, however, clear the way for Yudhishthira. He had to face an obstruction of another vicious person before he could complete his Rajasuya sacrifice.