Chapter 49 Krishna blesses Mythila

The marriage of Arjuna and Subhadra was over and Krishna then thought about his next port of call. He went to Mythila to bless Shrutadeva and Bahulasva in appreciation of their devotion to him. Shrutadeva was a brahmana who had graduated to the intellectual maturity of detachment towards worldly desires and prosperity. His mind was ever engrossed in the meditation of Krishna. He subsisted on meagre unsolicited food to keep his body and soul together and led a family life as a matter of duty. Bahulasva was the king of Mythila, a descendent of the sage king Janaka. He was a great devotee of Vishnu. His mind was occupied in pleasing the Lord for the well-being of his subjects. Krishna thought it would be a good gesture towards Shrutadeva and Bahulasva to visit Mythila to bless the people.
 
            Krishna in the company of some intellectual pious sages entered the city of Mythila. They were invited by these dedicated devotees and he thought it his duty to satisfy both impartially. Therefore he used his illusory yogic power to be present in their places simultaneously without either of them knowing about it. Each felt honoured at the Lord’s visit and extended the hospitality in his own way.
 

 Krishna with Bahulasva
      
            In the palace, Krishna received all the comforts and attention as expected from a king. Soft beds were provided and many attendants stood by to serve him. The king asked his wife and children to bathe in the water used by him for washing the Lord’s feet. The king requested the guests to extend their stay in his house to sanctify it by the dust of their feet. Moreover, Krishna recognized that the people of Mythila had honoured them on their arrival in the traditional way with respect. Having all this in mind, he agreed to stay on and also blessed the people with welfare and happiness.
 
            In the humble cottage of the brahmana, the guests were honoured with reverence. The Brahmana danced in ecstasy on having Krishna as his guest. He considered himself twice blessed, as his poverty stricken house was, according to him, not worthy of having such distinguished guests. He offered them wooden planks as seats and kusha grass for beds. He washed their feet and offered fruits, roots, water purified by tulasi leaves and everything within his means to express his sincere devotion to the Lord.
 
After they had rested, the brahmana asked Krishna how he had chosen to favour a poor man who had nothing but his dedicated prayers to offer. From the time of creation, the association of man and the Lord has existed but only a few fortunate ones get to see God on this earth. Such being the situation, he said it was unbelievable that he has been one of those whose cottage has been graced by the Lord. To this Krishna replied, “I make no distinction among my devotees. They are uniformly dear to me, no matter poor or rich. I am pleased with those who respect the well-versed brahmanas and those who show interest in adhering to the spiritual injunctions of our scriptures. Reverence to brahmanas is reverence shown to me. Some ignorant people do not understand this and are disrespectful to pious people. Know them to be always in my company and also part of me. Propitiation of pious people would deliver one from this world more easily than performance of penance or going on pilgrimages. People favourably inclined thus, receive my blessings. There is no doubt about my grace for those who are directly devoted to me. You are one of them.” On hearing this from the Lord himself, the brahmana understood the profound universal principle of God towards his devotees- “EQALITY FOR ALL, PRIORITY FOR NONE.”
  