Chapter 45: Shishupala

            The completion of the rajasuya sacrifice was not an easy task for Yudhishthira even though Jarasandha was dead. The next hurdle was Shishupala whose anger was still soaring high against Krishna after the Rukmini abduction episode. It all started with a decision taken unanimously with the exception of Shishupala. There was a deep deliberation as to who from the large congregation of pious learned people should occupy the prestigious seat of honour. Bhishma suggested Krishna’s name. Sahadeva, the well versed brother of Yudhishthira, proposed Krishna as the most worthy person for the honoured position. He explained, “He is the Universal Lord, guardian, protector, omniscient, omnipotent, saviour of all during times of difficulty and above everything else he is impartial in conferring his benevolence. His qualities are outstanding and therefore he is the ideal person for the honour.” Sahadeva’s recommendation was acclaimed with total consensus by the august assembly of guests. Yudhishthira and family, enraptured by the overwhelming support for Krishna, washed his feet with respect and adorned him suitably for the occasion. The public paid their obeisance with their palms joined together and showering of flowers.
 

Rajasuya sacrifice
 
            Witnessing the all round felicitations, Shishupala got up from his seat with his hands raised to stop the proceedings. He accused the learned for allowing their intellectual power to be incapacitated of right thinking by the immature speech of a youngster. His speech was surcharged with anger and hatred. He said, “In this galaxy of eminent scholars, how could you nod your heads to place a cowherd on the pedestal of highest honour? He belongs to a community of Yadavas that has been ousted for over indulgence in the consumption of alcohol. As for his personal standing, Krishna has no family to call his own nor does he have a well directed pursuit in life. In a nutshell he is nothing but a vagabond. Such a person who does not have a respectable antecedence is ineligible for any kind of adoration, what to speak of elevated honour.” The entire assembly of pious people felt that this kind of uncivilized outburst of hatred should not be tolerated and decided to boycott him enmasse. Pandavas also thought it disrespectful to Krishna if they continued to stay there, hearing the venomous words. The empty hall with just his supporters hanging on was an insult to Shishupala. With his sword drawn, he charged towards Krishna, sitting undaunted by the disruption created by his cousin. Krishna was keeping count of his sinful words and finally when the limit of endurance had been surpassed, the discus went flying and sliced the neck to dislodge Shishupala’s head. The miracle that occurred after his death, left the onlookers flabbergasted. A bright radiance emanated from the lifeless body and entered into Krishna. Emancipation of a wicked person like Shishupala doubly convinces us the merciful attitude of the Lord. The Lord blesses those who constantly think of him even if it be out of enmity like Shishupala or Kamsa.
 

Shishupala killed
 
Interesting Anecdotes

 

Shishupala: Shishupala was the son of the king of Chedi. His mother was the sister of Vasudeva and the aunt of Krishna. When Shishupala was born, he had three eyes and four hands. He brayed like a donkey on birth. The mother was extremely scared to have such an unusually odd son. Fear prompted her to get rid of the child by killing it. A heavenly voice said, “Do not kill the child. He is destined to become a king. The time of his death has not approached though the person to kill him has already taken birth.” To this the queen was eager to know the identity of the person. The voice replied, “When the child’s extra arms and eye fall on coming in contact with a particular person, understand him to be your son’s killer.”
 
The parents had no peace of mind till they knew the person who would be responsible for their son’s death. People from far and near were called to lift the child to find out the mysterious person. Balarama and Krishna heard about the birth of their cousin and came on a visit. As soon as Krishna lifted the infant, the extra arms and eye fell down. Krishna’s aunt was shocked to know that her nephew was going to kill her son. She begged Krishna to pardon her son if he committed any sin and spare his life. Krishna gave his word to his aunt to pardon her son not for one sin but for a hundred transgressions of moral and ethical conduct. Trusting that her nephew would not belie his words, her anxiety was calmed for the present. She had secured a generous concession which she did not expect her son to exceed in his life. To keep his promise to his aunt, Krishna did not react till Shishupala crossed the hundred mark limit while he was heaping abuses. He deployed his discus for sending his head rolling to the ground.
 