Chapter 39: Rukmini marries Krishna

           As time went by, Balarama and Krishna reached the marriageable age. Brahma sent Raivata, the king of Avartta to Mathura. He gave his beautiful daughter Revati in marriage to Balarama. Krishna’s wedding was action packed with excitement which made the proceedings very absorbing.
 
            Bhishmaka, the king of Vidarbha had five sons and a daughter Rukmini. She was believed to be the incarnation of Goddess Lakshmi. Rukmini was impressed by Krishna’s prowess and accomplishments. Krishna too was attracted by Rukmini’s beauty, large-heartedness and exemplary character. Mutual fascination aroused the desire in both to come together in wedlock. Of the sons, the eldest son Rukmi was assertive. He acted as a spoke in their relationship. Arbitrarily, he decided on Shishupala, the king of Chedi, as the prospective groom for his sister Rukmini, much against her wish. She was desperate to inform Krishna about her marriage proceedings and reveal to him her strong choice in his favour. She wanted to send a proposal to him but hesitated to initiate her own marriage. Finding no other alternative, she decided to send a brahmana to Dvaraka with a letter to Krishna. She wrote, “O Lord! My heart has been invaded by your handsome personality and glorious deeds. I cannot even dream of another man being my husband. It is natural for any woman, who knows your blemishless character as well as your high lineage, to desire your hand. I yearn for you and I hope you will gratify my desire. My marriage with Shishupala has been fixed for tomorrow. I would suggest we get married by the rakshasa mode of marriage, one of the eight methods approved by the Hindu scriptures. According to this, the bride is carried away by force after killing the bride’s relations. I also have another idea to avoid killing my family people. Tomorrow morning, as is customary, I will be led in a procession to the temple of Uma. That would be the opportune moment for you to abduct me. So you will have to reach here well in time for the procession. Failing to win your favour, I will go on hunger strike till death.”
 

Rukmini sends messenger to Krishna
  
            Krishna went into quick action. He harnessed his best steeds with Daruka as the charioteer. In the company of Balarama and the brahmana, he covered the long distance overnight. Balarama anticipated a stiff opposition when he heard about Krishna’s abduction plan. Therefore he went with ample army protection, equipped to retaliate, if the situation called for it.
 
            Bhishmaka was making lavish arrangements for his daughter’s marriage with Shishupala. Bhishmaka and Shishupala’s father, Damaghosha, individually performed the propitiatory rituals and offered gifts to the brahmanas with reverence. In the meanwhile, Rukmini was getting restless as the brahmana she had sent to Krishna had not returned even after dusk. She was apprehensive that her action was impulsive and had earned Krishna’s displeasure. She also doubted that it did not have the approval of the divine couple Maheshvara and Parvati, their tutelary deities. While Rukmini’s thoughts were oscillating between uncertainty and hope, the brahmana’s arrival in the inner apartments infused life and delight in her. When Bhishmaka heard of the arrival of Balarama and Krishna, he thought they had come with eagerness to participate in the wedding festivities of Rukmini. He extended a wonderful welcome to the honourable guests.
 
            The people of Vidarbha were all admiration for Krishna. They thought he would be an ideal match for their princess and prayed that God should make the union possible. Rukmini was led to the temple of Ambika, next morning, in a well guarded procession. Rukmini meditating on Mukunda [Krishna], entered the temple along with the wives of the brahmanas. Those women asked her to pray to the family gods to bless her with the good fortune of having Krishna as her husband. These words were pleasing to the heart as they were a resonance of her thoughts. The brahmana wives made the necessary propitiations to the Goddess along with Rukmini and she broke her fast by partaking the remnants of the offering. As she came out of the temple, she looked round to spot Krishna. Not knowing the secret of Rukmini's plans nor Rukmi's decision, the hearts of the numerous kings assembled to try their luck were throbbing expectantly.
 

Krishna abducts Rukmini
 
            When she approached Krishna, he effortlessly lifted her and drove her away in his chariot. While Shishupala’s friends thought that the marriage between him and Rukmini was a forgone conclusion, they stood aghast at the turn of events. Jarasandha and many other kings cursed themselves for helplessly looking on while a mere cowherd carried away the coveted prize. They said, “Fie upon us to call ourselves warriors. We are unworthy of wielding the bow and arrow.” The enemy army chasing Krishna’s chariot, faced a severe blow and they soon marched a retreat. Crest fallen Shishupala was comforted by Jarasandha who quoted his own case as a morale booster. He said, “I have been defeated by Krishna seventeen times but I am not demoralized. I am still hopeful of a win against that cowherd boy. Krishna’s luck is at present in the ascendancy. But in the near future, it will surely come down like the rim of a wheel, when we can ensure our victory over him.” The lion with his pride shattered, was somewhat consoled and he returned, licking his wounds.
 
            Rukmi took it as a personal insult because this match had been opposed by him from the very beginning. He refused to accept defeat. His mind was overpowered by two thoughts, revenge on Krishna and the recovery of his dear sister. He vowed not to rest in peace till he had successfully executed his resolve. He attacked Krishna with great vigour but all his arrows were arrested and his sword broken to pieces. When Krishna was about to kill Rukmi, Rukmini fell at his feet and pleaded to spare her brother’s life. Out of respect for her words, he tied him with a cloth. Shaving half of his head and beard, Krishna inflicted the most severe humiliation on Rukmi.
 

Rukmi bound by Krishna
  
            Rukmi decided to keep away from his kingdom, ashamed of facing people with his disfigurement and also he had not yet carried out his vow. He built a huge city named Bhojakuta, on the outskirts of his kingdom and established himself there, not to move out till he had avenged his insult. Krishna and Rukmini were received with thunderous welcome. Amidst all round celebration, they were married. Though the Krishna-Rukmini episode evoked astonishment, it was conducive to universal acclaim. Krishna being the Supreme Lord and Rukmini his divine consort, their union was inevitable on earth.
 

Krishna Rukmini wedding