Chapter 52: Mission Accomplished

The Yadavas were thriving under the protective grace of Krishna which had made them insolent and indestructible by any power. So Krishna thought he had to do the needful to balance evil and piety on earth. Vanquishing the community of the Yadus was the only way it could be brought about. This action of Krishna might give an impression of his hard hearted treatment of his own people. Emotional or sentimental affinity had no place in Vishnu’s scheme of things. Destroying the wicked and arresting the proliferation of sin was the aim of his descent on earth and he did what was right to achieve the end. Moreover, we must not lose sight of one important fact. The incarnation of Vishnu as Krishna took place with the prior arrangement that the celestial gods would be born in the Yadava community to assist the Lord. Their appearance on earth was illusory and an excuse had to be created to dissolve the illusion.
 
            When the curtain had to be finally drawn, Krishna thought of creating a situation conducive for the execution of his plan. The destruction of the Yadus started with the departure of some intellectual sages to a sacred shrine, a little distance from Dvaraka. A group of princes sporting there were tickled to have fun at the expense of the sages. The princes took Jambavati’s son Samba in a woman’s attire and addressed the sages with great humility about a matter of genuine concern. They said, “This lady with us is nearing her full term of pregnancy. She is shy to ask you, who can look into the future, whether the baby to be born would be a male or a female. Her wish is to have a boy. On her behalf could we request you to satisfy our curiosity?” The sages were furious at the impudence of the princes who were trying to test their intellectual acumen. The anger burst out as a curse and they said, “She will give birth to an iron club which will wipe out the entire community of the Yadavas from the face of the earth.” The princes panicked because their thoughtless fun had led to a disastrous consequence. Instantly an iron rod emerged from the deceptive pregnancy. They were trembling, not knowing how to reveal the secret story of the iron rod to the people. They presented it before the king, apologetically coming out with the truth. The Yadus were confused about the best means to avert the calamity. It occurred to them, they could pulverize the iron club and throw it into the ocean. The fine powder sunk in the deep ocean, they thought, could do no harm. So they carried out the plan. A small bit remained which could not be reduced any further. Not anticipating any danger from the negligible piece, they flung that also into the water. The Yadus were at peace after successfully getting rid of the iron rod, as they thought the curse could not take effect now. But to nullify a curse was not that easy. The small iron piece was swallowed by a fish and it finally reached the hands of a hunter. The hunter named Jara shaped the piece into arrow heads, and preserved it for future use.
 
            In Dvaraka, Krishna observed some ill omens in heaven, earth and all the celestial regions. He knew the gloomy signals as portending the impending disaster that would overcast the city of Dvaraka. Krishna called the Yadavas and said, “I foresee a formidable occurrence in this city. I feel we take note of the alert warning and evacuate the city with immediate effect. The women, children and the old can be transported to Sankhyadhara while we take up residence at Pravasa along the banks of river Sarasvati. We will cleanse our sins by serving the sages through gifts to provide them comforts in every way possible. Know it is destiny that steers one to the heights of prosperity and also throws into the abyss of misery. We must try to shape our destiny by meritorious deeds.” Krishna’s advice was acceptable to them. 
 
            The Yadus, who were following the ceremonial injunctions, suddenly indulged in heavy drinking which made them lose their sobriety. Mentally unstable due to intoxication, they started fighting fiercely among themselves for no reason. They picked up their swords, maces, bows and arrows in a killing frenzy. When the weapons were broken, they pulled the araka grass to strike at each other. The grass stems were as hard as an iron mace. It is believed by people even today that the powdered iron rod in the ocean took the form of the araka grass because according to the curse the iron club was to be instrumental in the extinction of the Yadus. When Krishna and Balarama tried to dissuade them from the madness, they began to attack them as enemies. Krishna and Balarama protected themselves by raising their mace. The Yadavas went at one another ferociously till the whole race went down without trace, with the exception of Krishna and Balarama. Krishna then breathed a sigh of relief, satisfied with the completion of his targetted mission.
 
            Balarama seated at the brink of the ocean, unified his soul with the Supreme Universal Soul in meditation. Renouncing the world of humans, he returned to his abode of ultimate bliss.
 
            Krishna was depressed to find himself isolated and felt the need to relax at the foot of the ashvattha tree. He assumed the divine effulgent form with four arms adorned with the distinct identities of Vishnu. Spreading the weapons around him on the ground, he lay resting his left leg on his right thigh. Then the fowler, possessing the special arrow heads made out of the cursed iron club piece, mistook the red foot of Krishna for the face of a deer. He aimed his dreadful arrow, striking deep at the Lord’s foot. Durvasa had given Krishna a boon that his entire body except his feet would be invulnerable. So when the hunter’s arrow pierced Krishna’s feet, the Lord knew that it was the cause for the end of his incarnation  
 
            On closer look, the hunter identified the divine form with four arms. He regretted for his cruelty, fell at Krishna’s feet and begged forgiveness. He chose death sentence as most appropriate. It would, in future, save virtuous and pious people from such condemnable acts from professional hunters like him. He praised the Lord, “You are beyond the cognition of even Brahma and Shiva. How can I, an ignorant man of low lineage, understand your greatness?”
 
            Krishna was sorry for the hunter who was blaming himself for what had happened. He consoled him saying, “Whatever has happened was contrived by me and not due to any fault of yours. You may now depart to heaven, the abode of the holy persons. Treat it as my command.” Jara went round Krishna in obeisance, ascended the celestial balloon to reach heaven.
 
            Daruka, the trusted charioteer of Krishna, came by in search of his Lord. He was thrilled at the sight of Krishna who narrated the entire happenings and ordered him to return to Dvaraka without delay. Daruka was to inform of the extinction of the Vrishnis, the disappearance of Balarama and also the condition in which Krishna was lying. Krishna also cautioned about the upsurge of the ocean after his departure from earth resulting in a deluge over the city of Dvaraka. He further advised him to go to Indraprastha with his family and relatives. Arjuna should be instructed to take responsibility of the safe custody of his parents Vasudeva and Devaki. Finally Krishna gave Daruka a parting guidance on how he should lead his life. He said, “Virtuous life will help in acquiring spiritual knowledge, cleanse the mind of worldly attachments and direct it to the ultimate beatitude.”
 
            Amidst the conversation between the two, Daruka noticed with astonishment, Krishna’s weapons rising upwards to heaven in a brilliant chariot. Realising that the time to be separated from Krishna had approached, the charioteer offered his heartfelt respects. With a heavy heart, he took leave of his beloved Lord to go to Dvaraka. Falling at the feet of Vasudeva and Ugrasena, Daruka sorrowfully narrated every detail as advised by Krishna. Permanent separation from Krishna was an unbearable shock to them and they fell in a faint. Devaki and Rohini soon breathed their last, with the sorrow of losing Krishna and Balarama. Arjuna was depressed on being deprived of a dear friend and a mentor. He moved the surviving women, children and the old to Indraprastha. He installed Vajra, the only surviving Yadava on the throne.
 

 
 Krishna departs to Vaikuntha
           
            Krishna departed to his abode in his mortal form. He did not consign his body to the flames because of his strict ascetic discipline on fire. Since he had revealed to the pious that virtue is the source of salvation and also presented his divine person as an incarnation striving hard for the benefit of human beings, he did not wish to leave his body on earth. When Krishna was about to depart, Brahma, Shiva, Indra and other celestial gods assembled to witness the Lord retiring to his heavenly residence but the miraculous disappearance escaped the sight of most gods except Brahma and a few others. Soon after Krishna left the world, there was a tremendous deluge that submerged the city of Dvaraka. Everything disappeared except Krishna’s palace, which majestically stood unscathed through the floods.
 
The songs and verses sung by the sages and poets about the childlike pranks of Krishna and also the miraculous feats of the Lord are wonderful renderings. They would reach us to the Paramapada, even if they are merely heard with devotion.
 
?????? ??? ???????? ????  ????? ? ??????  |
??????? ??????? ????????????????s????????   ||

Vanamali gadi sharngi shankhi chakri cha nandaki
Shriman narayano vishnur vasudevobhirakshatu
 
May Shriman Narayana, who is Vishnu and Vasudeva protect us. He wears the vanamala. He weilds the mace, the bow sharnga, the conch, the discus and the sword nandaka. 