Chapter 41: Rukmi meets his fate

            The simmering anger of Rukmi flared up beyond control even at the very thought of Krishna while along side, his love for his sister was proportionately increasing. He was aware that marriage among children of brother and sister did not have scriptural sanction. Yet, his bond of affection took precedence. Disregarding his hatred for Krishna, he brought about a number of marriages within the family. Rukmini’s son Pradyumna married Rukmi’s daughter in a svayamvara. Aniruddha, son of Pradyumna and grandson of Rukmini accepted the hand of Rochana, grand-daughter of Rukmi. Rukmini’s daughter Charumati became the wife of Bali, son of Keertivarman.
 
            Krishna’s entire family went to Bhojakuta for the marriage of Aniruddha and Rochana. After the celebrations, Rukmi was prodded by the other kings to have a game of dice with Balarama. They assured Rukmi that he stood on firm grounds for settling old scores as Balarama was not very good at the game. Excited at his good prospects, he invited Balarama to the game. Balarama lost a number of games and Rukmi ridiculed his opponent with a broad smile exposing his complete set of teeth.
 
Extremely over confident, Rukmi put up the stake to one lakh of rupees. Unfortunately, he lost this game but by deceit declared himself victorious. Balarama was digusted with Rukmi’s dishonesty and challenged him for a crore of rupees. Losing this game also, Rukmi thought his manipulation would work again and declared the august assembly as witness to his victory. Contradicting his announcement, a heavenly voice condemned him for resorting to falsehood when he had actually lost the bet.
 
            Ignoring the heavenly voice, Rukmi called Balarama as belonging to the forest bred cowherd community in an insulting tone. Rukmi said with pride of lineage, “Only kshatriyas like us know the game of dice and the techniques of warfare. You ignorant forest rangers! Can you, with confidence, claim superiority over us in any field that requires skill?” Balarama was very patient all through but now he thought he had come to his tether’s end. Unable to contain his anger, he killed Rukmi with his mace and pulled out his set of teeth arrogantly displayed just a little earlier. The other supporters of Rukmi, battered by the mace, fled from the assembly. Balarama’s achievement gave immense satisfaction to his people. Aniruddha and his newly wedded wife Rochana went to Kaushasthali from Bhojakuta on a wonderful chariot.
 

Balarama slays Rukmi