Once during a gathering of gods, sages, prajapatis and other divinities in a sacrifice, there was a minor incident that snowballed into a major scuffle between Shiva and Daksha. When everyone had taken their seats, the illustrious prajapati Daksha walked in. He offered his respects to his father Brahma and proceeded to the honoured seat offered to him. Everyone stood up as a mark of respect and waited for Daksha to be seated. Then Daksha noticed that Shiva was already sitting, even before he was in his place. As the father of Sati, thereby Shiva’s father-in-law, he took it as a blatant insult. Daksha’s anger erupted like a volcano and he spat out derogatory abuses followed by a curse. He started off at a tangent calling him inauspicious though with the name Shiva signifying auspiciousness. He said, “It was destiny that tied me down to him by the advice of Brahma. I have thus sacrificed my chaste daughter Sati by agreeing to give her in marriage to this wicked man who has transgressed the basic code of conduct. With ashes from the funeral pyre smeared all over his body, human skulls round his neck as garland, residing in the cremation ground among spirits and ghosts, unkempt matted hair, oh! What a repulsive personality he bears. He will not be treated at par with gods nor will he partake any sacrificial offerings in their company.”
 

            Daksha curses Shiva

Shiva remained in his seat without any reaction. His ardent follower Nandi could not contain himself. He retaliated with a counter curse on Daksha and his followers. He shouted at Daksha, “You are engulfed in the darkness of ignorance. Your ego is inflated to such an extent that you have no spiritual elevation. You are merely rolling in the mire of worldly pleasures. The cause of this is due to the incorrect or rather no understanding of the Vedas. May you continue to suffer going through the cycle of birth and death in this material world! May you with your followers, never acquire the mental illumination for spiritual bliss!” Daksha in response uttered another curse on the devotees of Shiva. Like Shiva, he wished them also to be amidst inauspicious things, smeared with ashes. After the emotional outburst, he left the assembly in a huff, despite requests to stay on, from the eminent guests present there. Shiva, though maintaining his composure, was terribly upset at the enmity building up towards the destruction of the two rivals. However, the sacrifice was completed without any hindrance by the prajapatis assembled there.
 

 