Daksha became very proud on being appointed as the head of the patriarchs. Hence he continued to insult Shiva. He intentionally ignored to invite Shiva to the sacrifice called brihaspatisava he was performing. Sati saw the celestial couples proceeding to attend the function, decked in fine clothes and jewelry. Sati was tempted to participate in the festivities along with her sisters and receive the gifts from her parents. She wanted Shiva to accompany her to be honoured as the son-in-law. He explained to her that it would end up in humiliation if he presented himself uninvited. He also advised her not to go as she was sure to come to grief. Though Daksha’s favourite daughter, Sati was now his enemy due to her association with Shiva. Pointing out Daksha’s insults to him for no fault of his, he requested her not to ignore his advice. Sati cast a scorching look at Shiva as an expression of her disconsolate mind and frustrated desire. Shiva, however, could foresee the destruction of Sati either way. So he saw no point restraining her any further.
 
She decided to disregard her husband and set forth for her fatherland. She was disappointed at the cold reception from her father who purposely avoided her. He made no enquiries about her or her husband’s welfare. Her mother and her sisters were very cordial though others kept themselves aloof for fear of Daksha’s reactions. There was no portion of the sacrificial offering allotted to Shiva. She could infer that it was a calculated action on her father’s part to rub in his animosity towards her husband. Her sorrow at her father’s persistence in insulting Shiva found an outlet in her angry words and she said, “I feel ashamed to call myself your progeny. You are blinded to the pious qualities of good people. You have failed to respect Shiva, the law maker of the universe, whom no one defies. I consider it below my dignity to have a body that has taken birth from a wily person. Hereafter, Shiva calling me Dakshayini will sound as an insult to my ears and I cannot allow him to use that epithet. In sheer disgust and hatred towards you, I have decided to end my life by intense yogic practice.” The yogic powers sent her up in flames in the final stage of samadhi. Sati’s supporters rushed towards Daksha to kill him. Bhrigu muni’s oblations into the fire brought forth gods to control the supporters of Sati, and sent them away from the sacrificial site.
 

 Sati renounces life
 
Hearing Sati’s renunciation of life, Shiva sent a gigantic person created from one of the locks of his matted hair. He was endowed with Shiva’s destructive powers to tackle the situation as deserved. Virabhadra, thus commissioned, could not sever Daksha’s head even with repeated attempts. In astonishment, he began to think of an effective device when a slaughtering machine nearby drew his attention. He instantly inserted Daksha’s head into the machine which severed it. Everyone censured the act but Virabhadra was hardly affected. By his power, the entire sacrificial structure was in flames and with his work completed, he went back to Mount Kailasha.
 
Narayana and Brahma had anticipated the disastrous consequence of the friction between Daksha and Shiva. Conveniently they absented themselves from the sacrifice.  Shiva caused the death of Daksha that left his sacrifice half way through. Gods sought Brahma for help. Brahma offered a suggestion that could solve the problem. He asked the gods to surrender at Shiva’s feet for forgiveness. Brahma also went to Shiva to advice him not to blow trivialities out of proportion and let bygones be bygones. Shiva told him that Daksha’s childish behaviour had not affected him in the least. His purpose was to chastise Daksha in the grip of illusory power of maya. Shiva graciously pardoned Daksha. Since Daksha’s head had turned to ashes, being thrown into the sacrificial fire, Shiva suggested a goat’s head could be put in its place .Other gods were variously provided with limbs lost in the combat.

 Shiva blessing Daksha
 
With Daksha revived with a goat’s head, everyone moved to the sacrificial ground with Shiva and Brahma. Daksha shrunk in shame at the sight of Shiva. As if woken from deep sleep, Daksha felt cleansed of his sins. He profusely apologised for his behaviour towards Shiva, ignorant of his power and greatness. He thanked Shiva for his kindness and admitted he would never be able to reciprocate it in equal measure. Before the sacrifice was resumed, Brahma, Shiva and Daksha propitiated Lord Vishnu inviting him to honour the occasion with his consort. Vishnu then made known to all that it was he who appeared in the three forms of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, in accordance with his activity of creation, preservation and destruction respectively. After all the disastrous happenings, calm prevailed with the reconciliation. There was a lurking grief in Daksha’s heart for having lost his dear daughter Sati. She was good enough to come to the sacrifice without any grouse against her father but he threw her out with his deliberate indifference. It pricked him deep with guilt because his foolish adamant behaviour had driven her to death. She was again born to Menaka and Himavan as Uma and united with Shiva as his wife.