There was a mountain named trikuta beautiful with scenic grandeur. Surrounded on all sides by the milky ocean, trikuta was extensive at its base and in height as well. It had three peaks of iron, silver and gold. Its caves resounded with sweet musical sounds accompanied by the roaring of frightened lions, anticipating danger from their enemies. In one of its valleys, Varuna possessed a fascinating garden with a lake. In the refreshing water of the lake, the celestial damsels had a bath after playing in the garden. In the nearby mountain forests, there lived a herd of female elephants, led by a very powerful male elephant named Gajendra. The male elephant struck terrible fear in other animals by trampling on the bamboo bushes and devastating huge trees. Intoxicated by his pride of strength, he did not realize the magnitude of the oppression he was inflicting on the animals.  
 
Once, the male elephant with his female friends went to the lake to quench his thirst. While he was sporting in the water, a strong crocodile caught hold of his leg and would not let it go. The combined effort of all the elephants was no match to that of the crocodile. The male elephant could not be extricated and the struggle appeared like a tug of war. The elephants feeling exhausted, gave up the fight as lost. Just then it flashed to Gajendra to eulogise Sri Hari who alleviates the miseries of all. He called out to the gracious God, “Oh Lord! You are the omnipotent God guiding all deities. You create, sustain and annihilate, the only Lord possessing the threefold power. Saviour of all creatures! Please save me from the firm grip of the crocodile.” On hearing the pitiable cry of the elephant, the merciful Lord descended to the spot on his Garuda. Emotionally overwhelmed by the Lord’s instant response, the elephant bowed low in obeisance, with his trunk raised with an offering of a lotus in it. The Lord rescued the devotee by striking his discus on the head of the attacking crocodile. There was all round joy among the celestial deities in admiration of the Lord’s mercy.
 
The indisputable truth that is apparent from the story is, ‘God delivers his devotees from the clutches of the wicked.’ Herein, the twofold mercy of the Lord can be observed. The crocodile in its previous birth was a gandharva by the name Huhu. He was cursed by Devala, another gandharva, for some unknown reason by which he had now taken the form of a crocodile. Lord’s discus redeemed it from the curse. It assumed the resplendent form of a gandharva, paid his obeisance to the Lord and returned to his region.
 
 It is heart rending to know the plight of Gajendra in the previous birth. There was a Pandya king named Indradyumna, a dedicated devotee of Sri Hari. Once in a hermitage on mountain Kulachala, the monarch was observing rigorous self control in a vow of silence. Wearing matted hair, he was engrossed in the worship of Sri Hari. At that time, the eminent rishi Agastya came to the monarch’s hermitage. Seeing the king not coming forward to offer respects to him, the rishi was infuriated. He took it to be a conscious indifference and punished him with a severe curse. He said he should become an arrogant elephant with a perverted mind. Accepting the curse as the will of God, the king had been living as an elephant since then. The tragic part of the elephant’s life was that the thought of Lord Hari had been erased from his memory. But at the time of complete helplessness, his devotion as Indradyumna stood him in good stead. When all physical efforts had failed to save him, the forgotten truth of the greatness of God came back to his mind. He realized that Narayana was the only power to pull him out of his difficulties. God saved him from the curse and the king’s earlier devotion helped him to salvation.
 

Lord Vishnu saves Gajendra