 The Kurukshetra war between the Pandavas and the Kauravas caused countless deaths on both sides. It could have been avoided if only Duryodhana had agreed to a compromise with his cousins. Influenced by his maternal uncle Shakuni, he was brain washed into hatching a plan against the Pandavas in a game of dice by deceitful juggling. [alongside is a drawing of Shakuni in the Javanese style] Yudhishthira, the eldest of the Pandavas, got miserably caught in the cunning game plan of Shakuni. Staking his wealth and brothers, he was drained of all his possessions. Duryodhana, now assured of his victory with the trickery of his uncle, decided to inflict the worst kind of humiliation on the Pandavas after which he expected them never to raise their heads for shame. He insisted Yudhishthira to pawn his wife, Draupadi, the last of his belongings. She was also lost in the game. Duryodhana was exhilarated, having achieved his evil aim. He sent his brother Dusshasana, to drag Draupadi by her hair to the court to disrobe her in public. It’s a different matter that Lord Krishna responded to her pathetic call and saved her from disgrace by extending her sari endlessly.
 

 
Krishna saves Draupadi from humiliation
 
            Bhima, the second of the Pandavas, the hot blooded of the lot, considered the very thought of such an act as very demeaning and unpardonable. Swearing to avenge the insult definitely sometime in future, he promised Draupadi to break the wicked man’s thigh on which he wanted to seat her. The Kurukshetra war soon broke out when Duryodhana refused to share the kingdom with his cousins as agreed upon. The iron man of the Pandavas, furiously charged with mace in hand, in a duel against Duryodhana, smashed his thigh and thus fulfilled his vow.
            Drona, the eminent teacher of archery for both Pandavas and their rival, was on the side of the Kauravas in the battle. Aswatthama, having a grudge against the Pandavas for causing his father Drona’s death, decided to pick up cudgel with them in an attempt to please Duryodhana.
            One day, Ashvatthama entered the war camp of the Pandavas. He cut off the heads of the sleeping sons of Draupadi and presented them to Duryodhana expecting accolades. On the contrary, Duryodhana was immensely depressed over the cruelty inflicted on the innocent boys. Draupadi was inconsolably grieved by the death of her dear children. Infuriated Arjuna pledged to bring the head of Ashvatthama before Draupadi, for her to stand on it and bathe. The vigorous chase that followed was beyond the capacity of Ashvatthama as he ran for dear life. In desperation, he invoked the brahmastra as the last resort. Arjuna was baffled at the approach of the weapon that was  flashing a powerful blinding light. Arjuna turned to Krishna for advice. Krishna told him to send out a counter brahmastra. At the same time he divulged the secret of Ashvatthama’s ignorance of retrieving the lethal weapon. Arjuna acted accordingly and withdrew the weapon of the opponent by sending out his brahmastra. Arjuna could have killed Ashvatthama but the fear of incurring the sin of brahmahathi, killing of a brahmana, held him back. Krishna explained to him that he need not entertain any fear as Ashvatthama was a villainous criminal who had killed young harmless boys. So, in this case, the traditional injunction pertaining to brahmahathi was not applicable. Moreover, he was expected to keep his promise to Draupadi. Arjuna refrained from the dastardly action. Instead, he bound his victim and presented him before Draupadi.   
            The pathetic condition of Ashvatthama overwhelmed Draupadi. Even in her sorrow, she advised Arjuna wisely in an emotionally surcharged voice. She said, “You should not forget your primary duty towards your guru Drona. You were the apple of his eye. Recognizing your dexterity in the science of archery, he wanted you to be known as his foremost pupil and that there should not be a second to match you. Killing his son would be gross ingratitude to him. You should be indebted to him for your distinguished standing among warriors. I think I should also remind you about Kripi, Ashvatthama’s mother, to whom her son is the main stay. The confidence in her son as protector motivated her to keep herself going even after Drona’s death. She would become destitute without him. Being a mother, I am aware of the sorrow of losing an offspring. I do not want another mother to lament as I do.” All the generosity of Draupadi could not save Ashvatthama from the ordained punishment. So, Arjuna had to strip his diadem, the severest punishment one could be subjected to. Added to his misery, his tonsure also had to be shaven and exiled from the kingdom according to the shastras.
            Ashvatthama’s hatred for Arjuna was building up, with his blood boiling within. His repentance for his cruel killing was overpowered by his demonaic impulse to exterminate the Pandava race. Like a man possessed, the strong urge to see the Pandava race heirless instigated him to try his luck with the brahmastra a second time. The weapon set out on its mission of killing even the foetus of the women of the Pandava family. Uttara was carrying Abhimanyu’s child. Abhimanyu was Arjuna’s son by Subhadra, Krishna’s sister. He met with his death in the war by the unethical attitude of the Kauravas. Since Krishna had always been their saviour, Uttara was sure of his assistance. She pleaded him to save her unborn child from the powerful weapon. Knowing Ashvatthama to be behind the mischief, Krishna aimed his sudarshana chakra which could supersede the power of the brahmastra. In the meanwhile, Krishna entered the womb of Uttara by his illusory powers and shielded the foetus from harm. Defeated thus, Ashvatthama made up his mind to withdraw from inimical activities and adopt the life of a recluse.
 

A drawing of Ashvatthama in the Javanese style

Interesting Anecdotes

Ashvatthama:  Infants usually cry as soon as they are born. But Ashvatthama neighed like a horse instead, similar to that of the celestial horse Ucchaishravas. So he was named thus.
Uttara’s foetus: According to the Mahabharatha, Uttara’s child was affected by the power of the brahmastra as it cannot be ineffective. The child was born dead but revived later by Krishna. 
Ekalavya: Arjuna was Drona’s blue boy. He wanted him to be his foremost pupil in archery. To pamper his own pride, Drona was as hard hearted as one could be. Once in the forest, his pupils witnessed a dog killed, with five arrows right in its mouth. Curious to know the source of the perfectly aimed arrows, they saw a boy of the Bhil community, named Ekalavya, practicing the use of the bow and arrow. Ekalavya informed them that his tutor was Drona. Surprised at their guru’s retraction on his principle, they conveyed to Drona of the boy’s claims regarding his tutor, besides appreciating his dexterity. Drona could not believe it and went to meet Ekalavya for verification. On being questioned, the innocent boy pointed to a mud idol under a tree. He said, “It has been my ambition to master the art of archery and I wanted the revered Dronacharya to be my preceptor. Unfortunately, I cannot aspire to be his student as I am not a Kshatriya. He could not be expected to go against his principle to have me under his tutelage and I would not accept any one else as my guru. This mud replica of my guru is my source of inspiration and guide. Every morning I begin my practice after paying my obeisance to this idol. Thus, have I learnt the art.” If it had been someone else, he would have appreciated the ability of the self taught boy and encouraged him further. But Drona could not be so broadminded to embrace the boy as his pupil. He strongly feared that Ekalavya would overtake his favourite Arjuna. He mercilessly demanded the boy’s right thumb as guru dakshina, teacher’s fees, since he had learnt from his idol. Drona’s wicked intention was Ekalavya, without his thumb, will be permanently disabled to use the bow and arrow. What an unimaginable inhuman cruelty! The devoted boy realized that he owed his knowledge to Drona. He expressed his indebtedness by readily offering his thumb to his guru without any regret.
Duryodhana: Duryodhana was the eldest of the sons of Gandhari. Gandhari had blindfolded her eyes as her husband Dhritharashtra was without sight from his birth. She did it as a sacrifice because she thought if her husband could manage without eyes then she too could afford to forego them. For many years she carried on like this when at a crucial juncture, she thought it necessary to remove the bandage on her eyes. She wanted to bestow on her son, the invincible power her sacrifice had yielded. She knew that the moment she removed the cloth from her eyes and first had a glimpse of the bare body of Duryodhana, the stored up energy would act as an impenetrable shield on her son. She asked Duryodhana to go to the river for a bath and return dripping with water, with not a thread of cloth on his body. He agreed and was returning as instructed by his mother. On the way, Krishna deluded him and said he, the crown prince, was going to be the laughing stock of the people if he entered the city nude. Out of shame, he put on a covering from his waist to his knees and stood before his mother. Gandhari removed the cloth and opened her eyes to see her son. She was disappointed to see him having a waist cloth round him. She said all the power of her eyes had shielded his body from harm, except the covered portion, leaving it vulnerable to attack. Duryodhana felt sorry for his mistake and offered to appear again as she had wanted but she said the stored up energy in her eyes, the result of many years of penance, had been exhausted and it could not be repeated. Bhima was thus able to hit him on his thighs during the duel. Here Krishna encouraged some foul play. He indicated to Bhima, Duryodhana’s weak point by tapping on his own thighs from where the hint was picked up. This annoyed Balarama as it is not fair to hit the opponent below the waist in a mace fight and he walked out of the battlefield expressing his displeasure.
 