Chapter 33: Govardhanagiri

 

Once, Krishna observed the people of Vraja busily organising a sacrifice. He was eager to know the purpose of the sacrifice. There was a doubt in his mind as to whether the sacrifice had the sanction of the scriptures or was it the customary practice that had in due course made it mandatory. When he asked his father about this, Nanda told him that it was to please Indra, the god of rains. He was believed to take the form of the clouds, come down as rain to bestow prosperity through good harvest. The ritual had been religiously observed for generations prompted by social injunctions. If discontinued, they believed evil consequences would spell doom. 
 
            This explanation might seem superstitious to us but not to the Vrajas. Krishna’s logical thinking was also not convinced. He said the form of birth in this life depends on a person’s deeds in the previous one. Every living being is assigned certain duties according to his social calling. If pleasing Indra were to give prosperity, it is obvious that he was promoting benefit oriented actions among people amounting to selfishness. On the other hand, if actions were treated as detached social service, each person earnestly carrying out his duty, things would fall into position with clock work precision. Forming of clouds and pouring as rain were natural phenomena occurring by the intrinsic atmospheric energy and the same principle was applicable on the entire earth. Therefore, Indra had no control over the operation of the natural occurrences anywhere, and Vraja was no exception.
 
            Krishna advised the people on the proper mode of action. Serving intellectual brahmanas, caring for the health of the people as well as the cattle and preserving nature should be the primary duty of every person. Performing any sacrifice to that effect would be ideal rather than trying in vain to propitiate Indra. People saw there was sense in what Krishna said and were prepared to follow his advice.
 
            Naturally, Indra did not appreciate the change in the cowherds. He was angry with Krishna for foiling the sacrifice where he occupied a place of importance and prominence.To spite Krishna, Indra wished to wipe out the whole of Gokula. Underestimating the power of the six year old boy, Indra contrived to send down torrential rain by his illusory power. The flood claimed the lives of a few cattle and human lives were also in peril. The people ran to Krishna seeking help to rescue them from the floods. They thought that untimely down pour expressed the revenge of Indra on Krishna. So, Krishna took it on himself to save the suffering people. He uprooted the mountain Govardhana, held it on his little finger as an umbrella to provide shelter to the entire Vraja people. Krishna inspired confidence and they brought their family and the herd of cattle under the improvised umbrella. They would remain protected until the rain abated, assured Krishna. Indra saw Krishna standing like a pillar holding the mountain for seven days and finally he had to accept defeat. Soon the floods receded and the people returned home with their hearts overwhelming with gratitude to Krishna for his prompt life saving response.
 

Govardhanagiri held on little finger
 