King Sagara was a perfect emperor and a devotee of Sri Hari. He was so named because his mother was administered poison by the other queens in jealousy to kill the foetus. Yet he survived surpassing their evil motives.
 
Maharshi Ourva advised Sagara to perform the Ashvamedha sacrifice to propitiate Sri Hari. Successful completion of the sacrifice, without any challenge from anybody, would declare the king as the sovereign ruler of the entire world. Otherwise, the challenge will have to be ably opposed to establish the sovereignty. The sacrificial horse was stolen by Indra. The faithful sixty thousand sons of Sagara excavated the earth in search of the horse to save the sacrifice. As they went deeper into the earth, the dug up area got flooded with water. Thus the ocean was formed and for this reason the ocean acquires the name Sagara ????? after the name of the sons of Sagara  The search led them to Kapila’s hermitage where they found the horse tied in its vicinity. Indra, to hide his guilt, used his illusory power against the Sagara sons and robbed them of their sense of judgement. They accused Kapila to be feigning meditation, having stolen the sacred horse. Their angry assault on the sage did not upset him. He calmly opened his eyes without any intention of having an altercation with the princes. But the ill treatment to the saint itself caused them harm. The fire of their own anger reduced them to ashes. There is a belief that they were burnt by the intensity of the radiance emanating from Kapila’s eyes. Another most accepted story that thr hear of anger of the sage's eyes burnt them down, does not seem tenable to my mind, as the sage was believed to have borne a very sober composed attitude to life, never provoked by anger.
 
Anshuman, the grandson of Sagara, traced the path excavated by his forefathers. He visualized Lord Narayana in sage Kapila at the very first sight. His desires and attachments vanished. He paid respectful obeisance to the sage and was grateful for being freed from the fetters of ignorance by his radiance.
 
Kapila asked him to take charge of the horse that belonged to his grandfather. He also told him that the heavenly Ganges had to be brought down to earth to wash away the heaped ashes of his forefathers. Anshuman and his son Dilipa were not successful in their effort. The severe austerities of Bhagiratha, Dilipa’s son could win the challenge. Ganges warned him that the earth would not withstand the force with which she would descend. Therefore she asked him to think of a way to overcome the problem. She alerted him about her going past the earth down to rasatala due to her force and all the efforts of Bhagiratha would be wasted. Another reason for her reluctance to flow down to earth was the pollution caused to her waters by the contact with sinful people. She would have no means to purify herself. Bhagiratha solved her second problem by saying that the physical contact with holy saints, dedicated to the worship of Sri Hari, by their ablution in the sacred Ganges would cleanse her of all the acquired sins. With regard to the first hurdle, he had confidence that his prayer to Rudra would surely ensure control of Ganges before she reached the earth. Entertaining strong faith in Shiva, he performed penances to please him. Shiva obliged by receiving the heavenly Ganges in his matted locks, from where he let the river flow to earth in a controlled stream. Thus she gets the name Bhagirathi. The sacred water of Ganges washed away the sins of Sagara’s sons accrued from their bad behaviour towards Kapila and were thus transported to heaven. Ganga continues to be regarded as a holy river possessed of the sanctifying quality.  
 

Bhagiratha Tapasya

 